

--- Page 1 ---

Sec. Biology Fi SB 2012 edition

Third Edition

Form One Student's Book

‘) KENYA LITERATURE BUREAU

Sec. Biology Fi SB 2012 ediitic



--- Page 2 ---

Contents

Prologue
Acknowledgements

1.0
1.1
1.2
13
1.4
1.5

2.0
Zul
2.1
2.2
2:2
2:3
2.3
2.4
2.4
2.5

3.0
3:1
3.2
3.3
3.3
23
SS.
3.4
3.4
3.5
3.6

Introduction to Biology

What is Biology?

Branches of Biology

Importance of Biology

Characteristics of Living Things
Comparison between plants and animals
Revision Questions

Classification 1

(a) Introduction

(b) The Magnifying Lens

(a) External Features of Plants and Animals
(b) The Diversity of Living Organisms

(a) What is classification?

(b) Need for Classification

(a) Historical Background of Classification
(b) Taxonomic Units of Classification.
Scientific Naming of Living Organisms
Revision Questions

The Cell

Introduction

‘The Light Microscope

(a) Handling and care of a microscope

(b) Using the Microscope

(c) Magnification

(d) Cell Structure as seen Under Light Microscope
(a) The Electron Microscope

(b) The Cell Structure as seen under the Electron Microscope
Preparation of Temporary Slides
Estimation of Cell Size

3.7

4.0
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.3
4.3
4.3

5.0
5.1
5.2

5.3
5.3
5.3
5.3
5.3
5.4

55

5.6

bof

Cell Specialisation; Tissues, Organs and Organ Systems
Revision Exercises

Cell Physiology

Introduction

Cell Membrane Structure and Properties

(a) Diffusion

(b) Osmosis

(c) Water Relations in Plants

(d) Active Transport

Revision Questions

Nutrition in Plants and Animals

Introduction

Autoptrophism

External Structure of a Leaf

Internal Structure of a Leaf

Summary of the adaptations of the leaf to its Photosynthetic function
‘The Process of Photosynthesis

Factors Affecting the Rate of Photosynthesis

Chemical Compounds which constitute Living Organisms
(a) Carbohydrates

(b) Lipids

(c) Proteins.

(d) Enzymes

Nutrition in Animals

Digestive System in Animals

Food processing along the Digestive tract

Digestion in the Stomach

Digestion in the Duodenum

Digestion in the Ileum

The Caecum and Appendix

Assimilation

Importance of Vitamins and Salts

Mineral salts

Factors Determining Energy requirements in human beings
Revision Questions

Index


--- Page 3 ---

CHAPTER ONE

Introduction to Biology
1.1 What is Biology?

In the primary school level you learnt about animals, plants and environment
in the Science course. In the secondary level, you will continue to learn more
about the animals, plants and the environment in different subjects. These
subjects are Agriculture, Biology, Chemistry and Physics. In Biology, you will
learn more about living things and their environment in greater detail. Biology
is a word that is derived from two Greek words bios and logos. Bios means life
while logos means knowledge. Biology is the branch of science that deals with
the study of living things. The aim of biology is to explain the living world in
terms of scientific principles. Living things interact with non-living things in
their physical environment, hence the study of biology has been expanded to
include the study of non-living things. Also included in the study is the role
human beings play in shaping their environment.

1.2 Branches of Biology

Biology is a large body of knowledge that is divided into two main branches
namely: botany and zoology. Botany is the study of plants while zoology is
the study of animals. These branches of biology are still wide and complex.
‘Therefore, at more advanced and specialised levels, there are smaller branches
of biology that exist. Examples are: ecology — the study of living things in their
surrounding, genetics — the study of inheritance and variation, entomology -
the study of insects, parasitology — the study of parasites. The list is long. As
one becomes more interested and specialised in the study of biology, he/she
becomes a biologist.

Study Question 1
Name at least six other smaller branches of biology.

1.3 Importance of Biology

In studying biology, one acquires very useful knowledge that can be used in
many ways. Some of these are listed below:

(a) In solving environmental problems such as shortage of food, poor
health services, pollution, misuse of environmental resources e.g.
forests, wildlife, water and soil.

(b) Entry into careers such as medicine, agriculture, public health,
veterinary practice, animal husbandry, horticulture and dentistry.

(c) The scientific skills that one develops while studying biology such as
observing, identifying, recording, classifying, measuring, analysing and
evaluating are all very useful in every day life.

(d) The biological knowledge acquired is useful in international co-
operation in such cases as:

* Joint development of HIV/AIDS vaccine by Kenyan and British
scientists.

* The co-ordinated fight against Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
(SARS) involving scientists all over the world.

* The fight to save the ozone layer from depletion through various
international agreements such as the Kyoto Protocol.

* Management of resources through international treaties such as the
CITES (Convention against International Trade in Endangered
Species).

Study Question 2
List five professional occupations that require the study of biology.

1.4 Characteristics of Living Things

Practical Activity 1
To observe living and non-living things
Requirements

A small animal such as grasshopper in a jar or a rat in a cage, appropriate feed
for the animal, a piece of stone and a piece of stick or a ruler.

Procedure

1. Place the food near the animal and observe it.

2. Disturb the animal using a piece of stick or ruler. CAUTION: Do not hurt
the animal. Observe the animal for five minutes.

3. Repeat these procedures using the piece of stone.

4. From your observations, list as many activities as possible which the
animal did. Compare these activities with those of the stone.


--- Page 4 ---

Some of the activities you have observed on the animal are some of the
characteristics of living things. These were; movement, feeding, response and
gaseous exchange. You may also have observed excretion.

The remaining characteristics which you could not observe are
respiration, reproduction, growth and development. These are the major char-
acteristics of living things which are summarised below:

(a) Nutrition

Nutrition is a process by which living things acquire and utilise nutrients.
Plants synthesise their own food using light energy, carbon dioxide,
(carbon (IV) oxide), water and mineral salts, while animals feed on
already manufactured foods.

(b) Respiration

Respiration is the energy producing process that occurs in all cells of
living things. In this process, organic compounds are broken down to
produce energy. During respiration, oxygen is usually used while energy,
carbon (IV) oxide and water are the products.

(c) Gaseous exchange

When living things take in air rich in oxygen and give out air rich in
carbon (IV) oxide across a respiratory surface, then the process is called
gaseous exchange.

(d) Excretion

Excretion is the process by which waste or harmful materials, resulting
from chemical reactions within cells of living things, are eliminated. Some
of these materials if left to accumulate in the cells, they would cause
poisoning of the living things.

(e) Growth and Development

Growth is an irreversible increase in size and mass. On the other hand,
development refers to the irreversible change in the complexity of the
structure of living things. Living things grow in order to attain the maxi-
mum size and mass which are essential for their body function.

(f) Reproduction

Reproduction is the process by which living things give rise to new
individuals of the same kind. Only living things have the ability to give
rise to new individuals of their own kind.

(g) Irritability

This is the ability of living things to perceive changes in their surroundings
and respond to them appropriately. For instance, living things react to
changes in temperature, humidity, light, pressure and to presence or
absence of certain chemicals.

(h) Movement

Movement is a change in position by either a part of or the whole living
thing. Progressive change in position by the whole living thing is called
locomotion. Movement in animals include swimming, walking, running,
flying, while in some plants, it is closing of leaves, folding of leaves, closing
of flowers and growing of shoots towards light.

Study Questions
1. List the uses of the energy obtained from the process of respiration.
2. List three characteristics of living things.

Collection of Specimens

In the study of living things, you need to make collection of specimens for
proper study in the laboratory. Therefore, knowledge of the apparatus used
and precautionary measures to take while doing so, become necessary. Some
apparatus used in collection and observation of specimens are shown in figure
1.1 (a) to (h).

(a)

A sweep net A sweep net is used for

catching flying insects

One of the common apparatus that is used in biology is the hand lens. The
hand lens is made up of a convex lens mounted onto a frame and has a handle.
It is used as a magnifier. The magnifying power of the lens is usually marked
on the frame of the lens itself, such as X8 or X10. This magnification is the
indication of how much larger the image will be compared with the object.



--- Page 5 ---

(b)
Fish net

(c)

Pooter

Mosquito netting to
prevent dit from
entering suction tube

@
Bait trap

Bait in a container

te)
Pitfall trap

Used for trapping small fish and
other small water animals.

Py maa :
Tube tor apply a /———_ Tube for collecting
acon a insects

For sucking small animals from
rock surfaces or barks of trees.

For attracting and trapping

small animals including rats.

___ Dustbin cover to
prevent tain from

_¢. getting in
&

For catching crawling
animals.

(f)

. For picking up small crawling
Pair of forceps ry animals (¢.g., sting imsects).

(e)

Specimen bottles For keeping collected

specimen. Larger specimens
require large bottles.

A magnifying lens is an
instrument used to enlarge
objects. Lenses are found in
the microscope and the
hand lens.

Fig. 1.1 (a -h): Common apparatus used to collect and observe specimens
Precautions during collection and observation of specimens

* Collect only the number of specimen you need.

* Do not harm specimens during the capture/collection exercise.

* Do not destroy the natural habitat of the specimens. After use, return any
live specimens back to their habitat whenever possible.

¢ Dangerous/injurious specimens should be handled with care. Such include
stinging plants or insects. Make use of forceps and hand gloves in such
cases.

¢ For highly mobile animals, the teacher will assist you to immobilise them.

Activity 2: Collection of specimens

Requirements

Sweep net, pooter, bait trap, a pair of forceps, specimen bottle, hand lens and
any other appropriate apparatus.

Procedure

1. Collect a wide variety of plant and animal specimens. e.g. grasshopper,
earthworm, grass, pinus leaves.

2. Place them into the appropriate containers and carry them into the
laboratory.

3. Observe the specimens collected and record common features observed in


--- Page 6 ---

(a) animals

(b) plants.

Note: Small organisms should be observed using a hand lens.
4. Preserve your collection.

Practical Activity 3

To collect and observe external features of plants and animals
Requirements

Jembe, sweep net, specimen bottle, forceps and potted plant.
Procedure

1. Identify a mature small plant and dig it out.

2. Using the sweep net provided, collect a grasshopper, put it in a specimen
bottle and cover the bottle.

3. Observe the external features of the two specimens. Record your
observations for each specimen.

4. Gently disturb the animal specimen and the potted plant with a blunt
piece of stick or a ruler. Record your observation.

5. From your observations, record the major differences between plants and
animals in a table as shown in table 1.1.

Table 1.1: Characteristics of Living Things

[@Mownew’ |

[anced

From the observations you have recorded, give several differences between
plants and animals. Compare your list with the summary shown in table 1.2.

1.5 Comparison between plants and animals

Table 1.2: Comparison between plants and animals

(a) Most are green in colour (have | (a) They lack chlorophyll hence
chlorophyll) henc are able to feed on ready made food.
make their own food from
simple raw materials in
presence of sunlight.

(b) Their cells have cellulose cell (b) Their cells lack cellulose cell
walls. walls.

(c) They respond slowly to changes | (c) They respond quickly.
in their environment.
(d) Plants do not move about (d) Most animals move about in
search of food and shelter.
(e) They lack specialised excretory | (e) Have complex excretory organs
organs

Revision Questions

1. (a) What is meant by the term Biology?

(b) List two branches of biology and for each, give a definition.

2. State four reasons why biology should be studied.

3. List four differences between a plant and an animal.

4. A motor vehicle is able to move and break down fuel to carbon (IV) oxide
(carbon dioxide) and water, yet it is not classified as a living thing. List
other characteristics of living things that are not shown by a motor
vehicle.


--- Page 7 ---

CHAPTER TWO

Classification 1

2.1 (a) Introduction

Living things are also called living organisms. There are numerous varieties of
organisms. These forms of life have characteristics that distinguish them and
enable biologists to arrange them into groups. Some of these living organisms
have been discovered and described adequately in many biology textbooks.
Some new living organisms continue to be discovered by research biologists.

2.1 (b) The Magnifying Lens

You recall that a magnifying lens is used for enlarging small objects. Figure 2.1
shows such a hand lens.

AUTH

WH mPa |
PE CD Call
\

iN i AV AN

Fig. 2.1: A hand lens

In order to use the hand lens to magnify an object, you have to place the object
on the bench and then move the hand lens with one of your hands from the
object towards the eye. As the object comes into focus, an enlarged image will
be seen.

If a hand lens is used in order to make a drawing of a specimen, the
magnification of the lens, bears no relation to the size of the drawing.

To work out the magnification of your drawing, use the following formular:

Leneth of the drawing

Drawing, magnification = :
Length of the object —

Figure 2.2 shows how this formula is applied.
2.2 (a) External Features of Plants and Animals

Study Question 1

What are the common external features observed in plants and animals?

Maenification = a length
chual lene

4
Magnification = ae

- =x2
licm

Fig. 2.2: A hand lens and magnification

From your answers, you notice that plants and animals have varied external
features. Some of these are listed below:

External features of plants

(i) Rhizoids as in moss plant.
(ii) Fronds in ferns.
(iii) Roots, stems, leaves, flowers, seeds, fruits and cones in higher plants.

External features of animals

(i) Tentacles in hydra.

(ii) Feathers in birds.

(iii) Shells in snails.

(iv) Wings in birds.

(v) Fur and hair in mammals.

(vi) Scales and fins in fish.

(vii) Proglotids in tapeworms.

(viii) Mammary glands in mammals.
(ix) Locomotory structures e.g. limbs in insects.
(x) Body pigmentation.

Practical Activity 1

To collect and observe animal specimens
Requirements

Sweep net, specimen bottles or containers, forceps, hand lens/dissecting mi-
croscope, preserved specimens, insecticide/ether/ethanol and forked jembe/
hoe.


--- Page 8 ---

Procedure

1. Use the provided equipment to collect animal specimens. Your collection
should include:
(i) earthworms
(ii) snails
(iii) millipedes
(iv) ants /termites
(v) locusts/grasshoppers
(vi) butterflies.

2. Use forceps to pick up crawling or slow moving animals. For flying
animals, use a sweep net.

3. Place each specimen into an appropriate container then close it.

4. After collecting a large variety of animal specimens, take them to the
laboratory.

5. Immobilise the specimens in their containers using a suitable chemical.

6. Remove the specimens from their containers and spread them out on a
working table or in a tray. Carefully, observe each specimen and record
the main observable external features. Use a hand lens or a dissecting
microscope to observe details of the small specimens.

Note: Do not throw away the collected specimens after the laboratory use.

Preserve them for future use.
Practical Activity 2

To collect and observe plant specimens

Requirements
1. Moss plants with rhizoids.
2. Herbs or shrubs with tap roots, fibrous roots and adventitious roots.
3. Stem specimens that have:
¢ thorny stems, smooth stems.
* succulent stems, hard stems.
¢ circular stems, irregular polygonal stems.
4. Leaves that show:
* rough or toothed and smooth margins.
* parallel veins, net-work veins.

Procedure

1. Take each specimen in turn and observe it carefully, using a hand lens
where necessary.

2. Identify and illustrate:
(a) the type of root.
(b) type of leaf margin.
(c) type of leaf venation.
(d) type of stem.
3. For each diagram drawn, work out and indicate its magnification.

2.2 (b) The Diversity of Living Organisms

Before embarking on the meaning of classification, you should take a look at
the different types of living organisms you had collected in activities 1 and 2.
Compare with those shown in figure 2.3 to be able to appreciate why classifi-
cation is necessary in the study of biology.

2.3 (a) What is Classification?

It is an area of biology that deals with the grouping of living organisms
according to their structure. Those with similar structures are put under one
group referred to as a taxon (Plural: taxa). The grouping also takes into account
the evolutionary relationships (phylogeny) since all living organisms at one
time had a common origin.

‘The science of classification is known as taxonomy. Biologists who study
taxonomy are called taxonomists.

2.3 (b) Need for Classification

Classification is necessary because of a number of reasons listed below:

+ To help in identifying living organisms into their correct groups for
reference.

* Groupings bring together living organisms with similar characteristics but
separate those with different features.

¢ To help us arrange the information about living organisms in an orderly
manner to avoid chaos and confusion that would arise if this were to be
done arbitrarily.

¢ To help us understand the evolutionary relationship between different
organisms.

2.4 (a) Historical Background of Classification

In early times, classification was artificial since the placing of living organisms
into groups was based on a few observable characteristics. Most of these
characteristics were personal conveniences to the early biologists like Aristotle


--- Page 9 ---

who lived between 384 and 322 B.C. This type of classification was in use for
about 2,000 years. In one such method, living organisms were grouped into
plants and animals. Plants were further grouped as herbs, shrubs and trees,
while animals were grouped into several groups namely carnivores, herbivores
and omnivores. Some biologists yet classified plants as edible and non-edible,
fungi and bacteria.

Modern classification has overcome the weaknesses of artificial
classification. This classification uses evolutionary relationships between spec-
imen and their ancestor. From the original parents, there arose new groups of
organisms that underwent structural changes which enabled them to live in
different habitats. This is what led to the diversity of living organisms observed
today.

The Swedish biologist, Carolus Linnaeus, who lived between 1707 and
1778 is remembered for his pioneer work and development of the modern
classification. Other scientists perfected it later after studying his works.

(as O;: Fok

Yeast cell 4 um wide

goN

le-celled algae 10 um

be e ‘Spirogyra (a thread like algae)

#, Pin mould NY a Lhe
: (grows on bread) *

Yeast cells chains

Bracken fern with
; ft branched fronds 60 cm

Re iif

Shrubby 10 mm high

we

Section ofa
common fern

Moss 100 mm high

Grass 30cm
high

Fox glove 45 cm high

Mushroom
5.cm long

Common fern with
unbranched fronds

Liverworts

reat (flat) 5 mm wide

Branch of #iRan
pinetree §

Oak tree
25 m high



--- Page 10 ---

Trypanosome
0.3 mm long :

Paramecium
microscopic

Coral (colonial)

50 mm tall

Yeast cells chains

: <
Planaria worm Schistosome T
apeworm
100 mm 15 mm long Smkng
Ragworm
“ap 15cm long
lLeachScm __ (Sea swimer)
Earthworm (sucks blood) Tubeworm 10 cm
jong live in atu
15cm long in Sea
eS —————
a spears
. Stu 10 cm Inc ing entac es. - o Ps
Snail 2. cm iong Octopus 10.cm wide
excluding tentacles
f ee
S 7
fet 4
oN Sea urchin
Starfish Brittle star 10cm wide

15cm wide 10 cm wide

Centipede
25 cm long

Millipede

2cm long 10cm long

Spider Locust 5cm
1 cmwide long

Sy

Shark maxi palate
maximum cm lang
length 18 m ee de

Frog 6 cm long
excluding legs

Crocodile hon about
about 9 m long 10 mlong

Sparrow 15 cm long

25mtall 37544
(does not fly) “17

Lioness about 2 mlong

Se

Kangaroo ~
2mhigh

f
\

Man 2m
Whale about 33 m long high



--- Page 11 ---

Fig. 2.3: Diversity of living organisms

2.4 (b) Taxonomic Units of Classification

These refer to the groups (or taxa) into which organisms are placed as a matter
of convenience. The grouping is based on easily observable characteristics that
are common in the group. Each taxonomic unit reflects the position of an
organism in relationship to the others in the classification scheme.

In a classification scheme, a hierarchy of groups is recognised and it
proceeds from the first largest and highest group, the kingdom to the smallest
and lowest unit, the species.

There are seven major taxonomic units as shown below.

The Kingdom

Living organisms are grouped into five kingdoms namely:

Kingdom Monera whose members are bacteria.

Kingdom Protoctista whose members include algae and protozoa.

Kingdom Fungi comprise moulds, yeasts and mushrooms.

Kingdom Plantae comprising moss plants, ferns, maize plants, garden pea,
pine and Meru oak and many others.

Kingdom Animalia whose members include hydra, tapeworms, bees and
human beings, among others.

Kingdom

Phylum (or Division)

Order

Family

Genus

A kingdom is divided into several phyla (or divisions in plants). The phylum
(plural - phyla), which is the second grouping, sorts out organisms based on
body plan and form. Within a phylum, members are further divided into
groups called classes. The basis of a significant variation in the fundamental
plan is usually in adaptation to a special way of life. Each class is further divided
into small groups called orders using some structural features. Orders are also
divided into families using some structural features, then families into genera

(singular genus). In a genus structural features are not easily noticed by most
people since the grouping is based on fairly recent common ancestral features
that are less adaptive. However, the genus can be divided into smaller units
called species. The species represent what scientists refer to as a kind of animal
or plant. As we go down the hierarchy, the number of organisms in each group
decreases but the similarities between them increases.

A species is the smallest unit of classification, which has hereditary
distinction from that of any other group, and whose members naturally
interbreed to produce fertile offsprings. Within the members of a species,
minor differences are still exhibited. Such include skin colour in human beings
and varieties in plants. The groups obtained on the basis of sub-division of a
species are termed as varieties, races or strains. The differences are usually
superficial unlike those which distinguish a species from another. These sub-
species form additional ranks which may be added to the hierarchy of classifi-
cation. See table 2.1.

2.5 Scientific Naming of Living Organisms

‘The present system of naming of living organisms was developed by Carolus

Linnaeus in the 18" century. It involved giving an organism two names in
Latin language. The Latin language was widely spoken and used by the scientists
during Linneaus’ time.

Generally, living organisms have their scientific names and common
names. The common ones are the local names by which they are known in
their local vernaculars. For example, cockroach is the English name for a
common insect found in cracks of houses and joints of furniture in houses.
The insect is known as olwenda in Dholuo, nyenje in Gikuyu and komba mwiko
in Kiswahili language. If the scientists were to use local names, they would not
be able to communicate with each other easily. This way, sharing of scientific
information and knowledge would be difficult. This necessitated a need to
develop a scientific language. This language is Latin.

The scientific names are the valid names by which living organisms are
known all over the world. In scientific naming, an organism is given a specific
name which adopts two names. This double-naming system is known as
binomial system (“two name” system). In binomial system, an organism is
known both by its genus and species name.

Table 2.1: Classification of a Human Being and Maize Plant


--- Page 12 ---

Phylum Chordata Pane
(or Division in plants)

‘The assigning of scientific names to living organisms is governed by a
definite set of rules which are internationally recognised and referred to as
binomial nomenclature, which literally means the rule of double-naming
system.

The principles of the binomial nomenclature requires that:

(a) ‘The first part of the scientific name is that of the genus and it should
begin with a capital letter, and the second name is that of species. The
species name should be written in small letters. These are illustrated by
the examples below.

‘The lion is Panthera leo, the leopard is Panthera pardus, the domestic
dog is Canis familiaris, the human being is Homo sapiens, and the maize
plant is Zea mays.

Study Question 2

Complete the table below
‘The information given above suggests that in a lion, Panthera is a genus
name and leo is a species name. Further more, it suggests that the lion
and leopard are closely related since they belong to the same genus.
They are distantly related also because they belong to different species.

(b) The scientific names should be printed in italics in books and printed
works, but in handwritten manuscripts and typed works, they should be
underlined as separate words e.g. Panthera leo.

(c) The specific name is frequently written with the name of a scientist who
first adequately described and named the organism, for example:
Balanus balanoides Linneaus i.e. a common barnacle that was first
described by a scientist known as Linnaeaus.

(d) Biologists must give a latinised name for a newly described animal or
plant species where a Latin name is missing. For example, Meladogyne
kikuyuensis is the scientific name of a nematode from Kikuyu while Aloe
Kilifiensis is a plant of the Aloaceae family first discovered in Kilifi.

Lion Domestic Dog | Garden Peas | Napier Grass

Phylum’ Division rT Ot~—CSY
ed ae

Order Carnivora Rosales

3 a ee ee

Scientific name | Canis familiaris| Pisum sativum[ |
Practical Activity 3
Naming of Organisms
Requirements

1. Your previous plant and animal collections.
2. Preserved plant and animal specimens.
3. Pictures of various organisms.

Procedure

1. For each specimen, attempt to write down:

(i) The name in your local language.

(ii) The English name.

(iii) The scientific name.

2. For those organisms whose scientific names you have not known, get help
from the following sources:

(i) The biology teacher.

(ii) Taxonomy text books.

(iii) The National Museum.

(iv) The East African Herbarium (at Nairobi National Museum).

(v) The Nairobi Arboretum.

(vi) The various Research Institutions such as Kenya Agricultural
Research Institute (KARI), International Centre for Insect and
Parasite Ecology (ICIPE), International Livestock Research Institute
(ILRI) and Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI).


--- Page 13 ---

Revision Questions

1.

The scientific name for the black jack plant is Bidens pilosa. Which

taxonomic group does the name pilosa refer to?

Define the term species. Explain why a leopard and a lion cannot breed

yet they belong to the same genus.

List the differences between plants and animals.

What is the relationship between a genus and a species?

(a) What is the name given to the double-naming system of living
organisms?

(b) Give reasons why scientific names are given in Latin.

Distinguish between:

(a) Common names and scientific names of living organisms.

(b) Taxonomy and taxon.


--- Page 14 ---

CHAPTER THREE

The Cell
3.1 Introduction

Animal and plant bodies are made up of small microscopic units called cells.
The cells make up the structures of the living organisms and are responsible
for carrying out the various biological processes. Some organisms are com-
posed of a single cell only and are said to be unicellular, e.g., amoeba. Others
are composed of many cells and are said to be multicellular, e.g., the garden
pea and the cow.

‘Therefore, the cell is the basic unit of an organism. A cell being a very
small structure that cannot be seen with the naked eye, hence it requires the
use of a powerful magnifying instrument known as the microscope.

In 1650, Zacharias Jansen invented the compound microscope which
combines two lenses for greater magnification. In 1665, Robert Hooke used an
improved compound microscope to observe cells.

Between 1650 and 1700 Antony van Leeuwenhoeck developed a better
microscope with lenses which provided greater magnification. He used this
instrument to observe the nuclei and unicellular organisms including bacteria.
In the 1930s, the electron microscope was developed, enabling much of the
internal structures of the cell to be observed. Since 1946 to date, the electron
microscope has been widely used in biology showing more details of the
internal structures of the cell.

3.2 The Light Microscope

In studying biology, some small objects require to be magnified so that details
can be revealed. A hand lens could be used but in some cases where finer
details are required, a microscope is used. A microscope is designed to give
finer details of an object that would otherwise, not be seen by the naked eye or
a hand lens. The commonly used microscope in schools is the light microscope.
It is called a light microscope because it uses light for illumination of the
specimen to be viewed. It is therefore important to know the parts of a
microscope and how to use and care for it. See figure 3.1 and table 3.1.

A microscope is a very delicate and expensive instrument and should therefore
be handled carefully.

3.3 (a) Handling and Care of a Microscope

When using a microscope the following rules should be observed.

Eye plece —

Coarse adjustment

knob Body tube

Fine adjusiment Revolving nose piece

knob .
Obdjective lens

Arm/imd

Diaphragm
Hing? screw pap
Mirror

Base or stand

Fig. 3.1: The light Microscope

Table 3.1: Functions of Parts of a Microscope

Coarse adjustment] Raises or lowers the body tube for longer distances to
knob bring the image into focus.

Fine adjustment knob] Raises or lowers the body tube through smaller dis-
tances to bring the image into sharper focus. It is

mostly used with the high power objective lens.
Diaphragm An aperture that regulates the amount of light passing
through the condenser to illuminate the specimen.
Eye-piece Contains a lens which contributes to the magnifica-
tion of the specimen under review.

Objective lens Brings image into focus and magnifies it.
Reflects light through the condenser to the object.

Revolving nose-piece | Holds the objective lenses in place. Enabling change
from one objective lens to the other.


--- Page 15 ---

Concentrates light on the object on the stage.

Stage Flat platform where specimen on the slide is placed.
It has two clips to hold the slide in position.

1. Always use both hands when carrying a microscope. One hand should
hold the base to provide support while the other hand holds the limb.

2. Never place the microscope too close to the edge of the working bench or
table.

3. Do not touch the mirror and the lenses with your fingers.

4. Dirty lenses should be cleaned using a special soft lens tissue paper or
tissue paper moistened with ethanol.

5. Other parts of the microscope may be cleaned using a soft cloth or tissue
paper.

6. Do not wet any part of the microscope.

7. Make sure the low power objective lens clicks into position in line with
the eye-piece before and after use.

8. After use, always clean and store the microscope in a safe place, free from
moisture and dust.

3.3 (b) Using the Microscope

1. Place the microscope on the bench with the stage facing away from you.
See plate 3.1.

2. Turn the low power objective lens until it clicks into position.

3. Ensure that the diaphragm is fully open.

4. Look through the eye-piece with one eye; meanwhile adjust the mirror
under the stage to ensure that maximum light can pass through. The
circular area seen is referred to as the field of view.

5. Place the slide containing the specimen on the stage and clip it into
position. Make sure that it is in the centre of the field of view.

6. Again, look through the eye-piece while adjusting the mirror under the
stage to ensure that sufficient light is passing through the specimen.

7. Use the coarse adjustment knob to bring the low power objective lens to
the lowest point. Viewing through the eye-piece, turn the coarse
adjustment knob gently until the specimen comes into focus.

8. Use the fine adjustment knob to bring the image into sharp focus.

9. Make a drawing of what you see.

10. For higher magnifications, turn the medium power objective lens into
position and adjust the focus using the coarse adjustment knob. For
sharper images, use the fine adjustment knob.

11. If finer details are required, turn the high power objective lens into
position. Now use only the fine adjustment knob to bring detailsinto
sharper focus.

Plate 3.1: Using the microscope

3.3 (c) Magnification

The magnification of the object viewed is calculated by multiplying the eye-
piece lens magnification by the objective lens magnification.

Example

If the eye-piece lens has a magnification of X5 and the low power objective
lens has a magnification of X10, then the total magnification is 5 x 10 = 50.
This is the number of times the detailed structure being viewed has been
magnified by the microscope.

Study question 1

Copy and complete table 3.2 in your exercise book.

Table 3.2: Magnification



--- Page 16 ---

Concentrates light on the object on the stage.
Stage Flat platform where specimen on the slide is placed.
It has two clips to hold the slide in position.

1. Always use both hands when carrying a microscope. One hand should
hold the base to provide support while the other hand holds the limb.

2. Never place the microscope too close to the edge of the working bench or
table.

3. Do not touch the mirror and the lenses with your fingers.

4, Dirty lenses should be cleaned using a special soft lens tissue paper or
tissue paper moistened with ethanol.

5. Other parts of the microscope may be cleaned using a soft cloth or tissue
paper.

6. Do not wet any part of the microscope.

7. Make sure the low power objective lens clicks into position in line with
the eye-piece before and after use.

8. After use, always clean and store the microscope in a safe place, free from
moisture and dust.

3.3 (b) Using the Microscope

1. Place the microscope on the bench with the stage facing away from you.
See plate 3.1.

2. Turn the low power objective lens until it clicks into position.

3. Ensure that the diaphragm is fully open.

4, Look through the eye-piece with one eye; meanwhile adjust the mirror
under the stage to ensure that maximum light can pass through. The
circular area seen is referred to as the field of view.

5. Place the slide containing the specimen on the stage and clip it into
position. Make sure that it is in the centre of the field of view.

6. Again, look through the eye-piece while adjusting the mirror under the
stage to ensure that sufficient light is passing through the specimen.

7. Use the coarse adjustment knob to bring the low power objective lens to
the lowest point. Viewing through the eye-piece, turn the coarse
adjustment knob gently until the specimen comes into focus.

8. Use the fine adjustment knob to bring the image into sharp focus.

9. Make a drawing of what you see.

10. For higher magnifications, turn the medium power objective lens into
position and adjust the focus using the coarse adjustment knob. For
sharper images, use the fine adjustment knob.

11. If finer details are required, turn the high power objective lens into
position. Now use only the fine adjustment knob to bring detailsinto
sharper focus.

Plate 3.1: Using the microscope

3.3 (c) Magnification

The magnification of the object viewed is calculated by multiplying the eye-
piece lens magnification by the objective lens magnification.

Example

If the eye-piece lens has a magnification of X5 and the low power objective
lens has a magnification of X10, then the total magnification is 5 x 10 = 50.
This is the number of times the detailed structure being viewed has been
magnified by the microscope.

Study question 1

Copy and complete table 3.2 in your exercise book.

Table 3.2: Magnification



--- Page 17 ---

Eye-piece lens magnifica-| Objective lens magnifica-| Total magnifica-
tion tion tion

X10
X10

X10

Cytoplasm “se: *> *- =f.

ee

Nucleus
Fig. 3.2 (a): Generalised animal cell
Practical Activity 1
The Microscope

Requirements: Microscope

Procedure

1. Examine the light microscope provided and identify its parts.

2. Draw and label the parts of the microscope provided.

3. State the functions of the parts that you have labelled.

4, Using the microscope provided, calculate the magnification using the
objective and eye-piece lenses. Record the information in the form of a
table. Refer to table 3.2.

3.3 (d) Cell structures seen under the light
microscope

Some cell structures can be seen under the light microscope. These structures
include the cell wall, cell membrane, cytoplasm, nucleus, vacuole and chloro-
plasts. See figure 3.2 (a) and (b). The structures within the cell are called
organelles. ‘These organelles perform specific functions within the cell.

Cell membrane

Nucleus

— Cytoplasm

Tonoplast

Fig. 3.2 (b): Generalised plant cell
3.4 (a) The Electron Microscope

‘The electron microscope is more powerful than the light microscope. It has
more complicated parts. The electron microscope can magnify up to 500,000
times and has a high resolving power. The high resolving power of the electron
microscope enables it to make out as separate things, objects which lie close to
one another. This high resolving power makes the electron microscope an
important research tool. The electron microscope uses a beam of electrons
instead of light to illuminate the object. Research scientists with the aid of an
electron microscope have prepared some of the detailed electron micrographs
that will be observed in the study of the cell. A picture of a scientist, using an
electron microscope is shown in Plate 3.2.


--- Page 18 ---

Under the electron microscope, greater details of the cell can be seen. Some of
the structures are as shown in figures 3.3 and 3.4.

Cell membrane

The cell membrane is also known as plasma membrane or plasmalemma. It is
seen to consist of three layers under the electron microscope. The three layers
are composed of one layer of phospholipid sandwiched between two protein
layers. See figure 3.5.

3.4 (b) The Cell Structure as seen under the Electron

Microscope

Mitochondrion
Golgi body
Nuclear membrane
Nuclear pore
Plate 3.2: A scientist using an electron microscope courtesy of KEMRI
: 7 ~~ Nucieous
Study Question 2
From figures 3.2 (a) and (b), list the structures seen under the light microscope Te: “27° Wt-—endopiasmic
: | eae . reticulum
in:

(a) animal cells.
(b) plant cells.

Practical Activity 2 Fig. 3.3: A Generalised plant cell as seen in an electron microscope
To observe permanent slides of plant and animal cells

Requirements

Microscope, permanent slides of cheek cells and onion epidermal cells.
Procedure

1. Place the slide of onion epidermal cells on the microscope.
2. Observe under the medium power objective lens.
3. Draw a well labelled diagram of one cell.

Repeat procedure 1, 2 and 3 using the slide of cheek cells.


--- Page 19 ---

Goigi body

Mitechondria
Cell membrane

_——— Lysosome

ve Smooth endoplasmic
Lh" reticulum

Pinocytic vesicle

Vacuole ———

Fig. 3.4: A generalised animal cell as seen under the electron microscope

SCC coco Protein layer

ARAMA

Phospholipid

MTree Tit aes

roe | a || aan il Protein layer

oie

Fig. 3.5: Cell membrane

The cell membrane is flexible and has pores. The main functions of the cell

membrane are:

1. The three layers give it strength to enclose the cell contents.

2. The pores allow movement of particles into and out of the cells. The
phospholipid layer controls the movement of water-soluble and fat-soluble
molecules in and out of the cells. The cell membrane is thus said to be
selectively permeable or semi-permeable.

Cytoplasm

Cytoplasm consists of a fluid medium in which chemical reactions take place.
It contains organelles and other inclusions such as starch, glycogen, fat droplets
and many other dissolved substances. The cytoplasm is not static but has a
movement known as cytoplasmic streaming.

Mitochondria (Singular-mitochondrion)

These are sausage-shaped and are sites of respiratory reactions that yield
energy for the cell. Mitochondria are bound by two membranes. ‘The inner
membrane is greatly folded into cristae to increase the surface area for respi-
ration as seen in figure 3.6,

Outer membrane

Inner

Matrix
Inner projections _{fiuid-filled cavity)

(Cristae)

Fig. 3.6: The mitochondrion

‘The arrangement and number of mitochondria in a cell depends on the cell
energy requirement. Cells, which require large amounts of energy, contain
many mitochondria. Such cells include muscle cell, sperm cell, apical mer-
istems and the kidney cell.

Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)

Endoplasmic reticulum appear asa series of interconnected channels, running
throughout the cytoplasm as shown in figure 3.7(a) and (b). It is continuous
with the outer membrane of the nuclear membrane. Some endoplasmic retic-
ula (plural of reticulum) have granules called ribosomes on their surfaces and
are therefore, referred to as rough or granular endoplasmic reticula. The others
are not associated with ribosomes and are thus referred to as smooth endo-
plasmic reticula. The rough endoplasmic reticulum transports proteins while
the smooth endoplasmic reticulum transports lipids.

Fig. 3.7 (a): Smooth Endoplasmic


--- Page 20 ---

2s = = 5
io Te eS
3S ‘@ as wee
ee

Fig. 3.7 (b): Rough Endoplasmic
Ribosomes

Ribosomes are spherical in shape. Some are scattered within the cytoplasm
while others are bound to the surface of rough endoplasmic reticulum. They
form sites for protein synthesis.

Lysosomes

Lysosomes are spherical sac-like organelles bound by a single membrane. They
contain lytic enzymes which break down large molecules, destroy worn out
organelles or even the entire cells.

Golgi bodies (Golgi apparatus)

These are stacks of membrane-bound tube like sacs. They are found close to
the cell membrane. Their functions are packaging and transport of glycopro-
teins. They are often involved in secretion of synthesised proteins and carbo-
hydrates. See figure 3.8.

Golgi vesicle containing
0 Z ox secretory ganule
ol}

( Vesicle

Golgi apparatus

09
RANKS

Fig. 3.8: The golgi apparatus
Centrioles

Centrioles are rod-shaped structures located just outside the nuclear mem-
brane.

They take part in cell division and in the formation of cilia and flagella in
cells where these structures occur. Plant cells lack centrioles.

Chloroplasts

Chloroplasts are egg-shaped. They are surrounded by two membranes and
contain a gel-like stroma through which runs a system of membranes that are
stacked together to form grana. The granum contains chlorophyll. ‘The chlo-
rophyll traps light energy that is used during photosynthesis.

Chloroplast is the organelle in which photosynthesis takes place. Refer to
Chapter 5, figure 5.3 on the structure of a chloroplast.

Vacuoles

Vacuoles are sacs that are filled with fluid called cell sap. They vary in size.
Animal cells contain small vacuoles while in plant cells the vacuoles are large.
Sap vacuoles store sugars and salts, therefore, contribute to the osmotic prop-
erties of the cell. In some unicellular organisms, food vacuoles store and digest
food while contractile vacuoles excrete unwanted materials from the cell.

Cell Wall

The cell wall is the rigid outer cover of plant cells and some lower organisms.
In plants, it is composed of cellulose fibres. It gives the plant cell a definite
shape as well as providing mechanical support and protection against me-
chanical injury. The cell wall allows gases, water and other substances to pass
through it.

Nucleus

Under the electron microscope, the nucleus is seen to have a double membrane
called a nuclear membrane.

The membrane has pores which allow the passage of materials in and out of
the nucleus. The nucleus is made of viscous fluid known as nucleoplasm in
which the nucleolus and chromatin materials are suspended. It controls all
the activities of a cell. The nucleolus is responsible for the manufacture of
ribosomes, while chromatin contains hereditary materials.

Study Question 3
(a) State at least five activities of the cell that are controlled by the nucleus.
(b) List the organelles found in both plant and animal cells.

Comparison between plant and animal cells

Plant and animal cells have a lot of similarities in their structures and functions.
However, there are several differences between plant cells and animal cells.
These are shown in table 3.3.


--- Page 21 ---

3.5 Preparation of Temporary slides

To observe specimen under the microscope, we need to prepare slides. There
are two types of slides, namely temporary or fresh slides for immediate use
during a laboratory exercise and permanent slides which can be preserved for
reuse.

Practical Activity 3

To prepare and observe temporary

Table 3.3: Differences between plant and animal cells

4, Usually has no vacuoles but when
present, they are temporary and
small structures within the
cytoplasm.

Plant Cell

1. Usually large.

2. Regular in shape.
3. Has a cell wall.

4. Usually has a large central
vacuole.

5, Cytoplasm and nucleus are
usually located towards the
periphery.

5. The cytoplasm occupies most
space in the cell with the nucleus
usually centrally placed.

6. Some have chloroplasts. 6. Has no chloroplasts.

7. Usually store starch, oils and 7. Store glycogen and fats.
proteins.

8. Has no centriole. 8. Has centriole.

slide of onion cells under the light microscope

Requirements

Microscope, clean microscope slides, coverslips, scalpel or a new razor blade,
distilled water, iodine solution, onion bulb, pair of forceps, dropper and
mounted needle.

Procedure

1. Cut the onion bulb vertically into four parts.
2. Separate a fleshy leaf from one of the parts.

3. Remove a thin piece of epidermis from this leaf using forceps as illustrated
in figure 3.9. Trim down the epidermis to about 5 mm long.

4. Place a drop of water on a clean slide and quickly spread the piece of
epidermis onto the drop of water.

5. Using a mounted needle, lower a clear coverslip on to the epidermis strip.
Do this gently to avoid trapping air bubbles. See figure 3.9(d).

6. Examine this temporary slide under the low and medium power objective
lenses of microscope.

7. Repeat the above procedure with another epidermal strip using a drop of
dilute iodine solution instead of distilled water to stain the cells.

Exercise

1. Make a large, neat, well-labelled drawing of two cells as observed under
medium power objective lens.

2. What improvement is there when viewing the stained cells compared to
the unstained ones?


--- Page 22 ---

; Microscope, transparent ruler marked in millimetres and prepared slide of
— —Forceps onion epidermis.

{h Pt he |

|

yo
a
Lm =

y Procedure

O(n AT api i 2 r :

[a Seperate 1. With the low power objective lens in place, keep a transparent ruler on the
stage of the microscope.

2. Focus so that the millimetres marks on the ruler are seen as thick dark
lines.
3. Estimate the diameter of the field of view by counting the one-millimetres

spaces between the first mark and the last one across the field of view as
shown in figure 3.10.

Dropper contaiming water

if
if
i}
+ + ——

LS” BES —= Place of onion
apiGenmnis on water

NS

y

p
AAsg
ee]
j
%

cc Mounted neadie

“i -

(d)

~ Caver slip

Fig. 3.10: Diameter of field of view

From figure 3.10 the diameter of the field of view is estimated as 6.0 mm.
. Convert the diameter of the field of viewfrom millimetres to micrmetres.

1 mm = 1 000

(e) L — 4

a A Reatty slide for viewing

Fig. 3.9: (a) - (e) Preparation of temporary slide of onion epidermis strip ”. 6mm = (6 x 1 000)

= 6 000
3.6 Estimation of Cell Size Use similar method to work out the diameter of field of view in
; ; . ; micrometres.
The size of a cell oa be estimated by use of a. light POETS ODE: Most cells are 5 Remove the ruler and place the prepared slide of the onion epidermis.
shorter than a millimetre and therefore, their sizes are measured in smaller 6. Count the number of cells along the diameter of the field of view. See
units called micrometre(um). figure 3.11.

1 millimetre (mm) = 1 000 micrometres.
1 um = 1 000 nanometres (nm)

Practical Activity 4

Latent | _ diameter of field
fees) +" of vein
To estimate the size of onion epidermal cells Ps

Requirements



--- Page 23 ---

Fig. 3.11: Estimating the number of cells
7. Calculate the diameter of one cell using th following formula

Cell Diameter— Diameter of field of view in um
No. of cell in the field of view
Using the example above:

Cell Diameter = 2900 um = 1000 um

cells ©
.. Diameter of 1 cell = 1 000

Follow these steps to calculate the diameter of the cells you have observed.

Study Question 4

(a) This procedure for measuring sizes of cells has certain limitations. List
three such limitations.

(b) Considering that cells vary in shape, what other dimensions or
8 ry P
parameters of the cell could be used to estimate cell size?

3.7. Cell Specialisation; Tissues, Organs and
Organs Systems

1. Cell Specialisation

Cells are structurally differentiated or modified to perform specific func-
tions. Such cells are said to be specialised. For example, the root-hair cell
has extended surface for absorption. A sperm cell has a taillike extension

for swimming towards the ovum see fig. 3.12 (a, b) examples of specialised
cells.

Fig. 3.2(a): Root hair cell

Fig. 3.2 (b): Sperm cell
2. Tissues
‘These are cells of a particular type that are grouped together. They perform
the same function. Refer to the figures 3.13 (a) to (d) and 3.14 (a) to (d).
Tissue types in animals

¢ This is a thin continuous layer of cells, for Lining and protection of
internal and external surfaces.

nucleus

Fig. 3.13 (a): Epithelial tissue

¢ It is a bundle or sheets of elongated cells with fibres that can contract. Its
contraction and relaxation brings about movement.

Fig. 3.13 (b): Skeletal muscle

¢ This is a fluid containing red blood cells,white blood cells and platelets.

* It transports many substances including gases, nutrients and protects the
body against infection.


--- Page 24 ---

a
2
fo}
®

Acrosome Canticle

i BN gd Chloroplasts
==" Nucleus

Fig. 1.14 (b): Palisade tissue

* Consists of special thin walled irregularly shaped cells.
They form packaging and storage cells.

. Nucleus

Fig. 3.3 (c): Blood Tissue

* Consists of strong fibres, that connects other tissues and organs holding
them together in position.

Fibroblast = Ejasticfipre Cell wall

Fig. 3.14 (c): Parenchyma tissue

* Consists of xylem and phloem. Xylem conducts water and the dissolved
mineral salts in a plant. Phloem conducts food substances in solution.

Fig. 3.13 (d): Connective Tissue Phloem

Fig. 3.14: Tissue types in plants Xylem

* It is a single thin layer of cells covering the outer surfaces. It Protects inner
tissues of plants from mechanical damage and infection.

Fig. 3.14 (d): (Vascular Bundle) conducting tissue
3. Organs

Various tissues occur in living organisms. These tissues may be specialised and
Cell wall grouped together to form a functional unit called organ. In plants, the organs
include roots, leaves, flowers and stem. In animals, the main organs are heart,
kidneys, brain, lungs, stomach and liver.

Nucleus

Cytoplasm

Fig. 3.14 (a): Epidermal tissue of a leaf

¢ This is a group of cells rich in chloroplasts containing chlorophyll. It has 4, Organ systems
site for the absorption of light energy and manufacture of food by

h heal Several organs whose functions are co-ordinated and synchronised to realise
photosynthesis.

an effective action in a living organism is referred to as an organ system. In
animals, some of the organ systems are digestive, circulatory, excretory, respi-


--- Page 25 ---

ratory, reproductive and nervous. For example, the digestive system is com-
posed of organs like the oesophagus, stomach, intestines and the associated
glands.

Revision Exercise

1.

Explain why only the fine adjustment knob should be used when focusing
a specimen using the high power objective lens of the light microscope.

. A drawing of 5 cm in length, was made of a beetle whose actual length

was one centimeter. Calculate the magnification of the drawing.

. What is:

(a) acell?
(b) an organelle?

. Define the following:

(i) A tissue.
(ii) An organ.
(iii) An organ system.

. Ifthe nucleus of a cell is removed, what would happen to that cell? Why?
. Name the organelles that would be found in large numbers in cells of a:

(i) rapidly respiring tissue.
(ii) secretory gland. In each case, give a reason for your choice of the
organelle.

. Compare the structure of plant and animal cells.
. Name the cell organelles that can be observed only under an electron

microscope and for each state its functions.


--- Page 26 ---

CHAPTER FOUR

Cell Physiology

4.1 Introduction

The study of the functions of cell structures is called cell physiology. Some of
the functions carried out by these cell structures include production of carbo-
hydrates through the process of photosynthesis in chloroplasts, energy pro-
duction by the process of respiration in mitochondria and protein synthesis in
ribosomes. For these physiological processes to occur, the cell must take in
raw materials such as carbon (IV) oxide, oxygen, mineral salts and glucose.
During the processes, waste products are released. Some of these waste prod-
ucts are harmful and must be got rid of from the cell. Hence, there is a constant
flow of substances into and out of the cell across the cell membrane in order
to maintain life in a cell and an organism.

In this chapter we shall discuss the movement of materials in and out of cells.

4.2 Membrane Structure and Properties

A membrane is a surface structure which encloses the cell and organelles. Such
membranes include the cell membrane, tonoplasts, nuclei membranes, mito-
chondrial membrane and chloroplast membrane. These membranes have a
common basic structure which regulates the flow of materials in and out of a
cell or organelle. One such membrane which is important to a cell is the cell
membrane.

Cell Membrane Structure

The cell membrane as seen earlier is composed of a phospholipid layer sand-
wiched between two protein layers. Thus the membrane is a lipoprotein layer
(made up of a lipid and protein layer). This gives the cell membrane a three
layered structure of about 7.5 nm thick, which is perforated by small pores
that allow the passage of substances into and out of a cell as shown in figure
4.1.

940) Protein layer

aAARAR AA

Phospholipid

Teri tee

CoOCoC3 — Protein layer

Pore

Fig. 4.1: Diagrammatic representation of the structure of a cell membrane
Study Question 1

How is the cell membrane adapted to its functions?
Properties of Cell Membrane

(a) Semi-Permeability

‘The pores that occur on a cell membrane allow molecules of small sizes to pass
but not those with large sizes. For example, when a cell is surrounded by a
dilute sugar solution, water molecules will enter the cell but not the larger
sugar molecules. The membrane is therefore, said to be semi-permeable.
However, the cell wall allows both sugar and water molecules to pass through
because it has large pores and it is referred to as being permeable. This property
allows the membrane to select what enters and leaves the cell.

(b) Sensitivity to Changes in Temperature and pH

Cell membranes have a layer of protein. These proteins are adversely affected
by extreme changes in temperature and pH. Such changes alter the structure
of the membrane and therefore, its normal functioning is hindered.

(c) Possession of Electric Charges

A membrane has both positive and negative charges. These affect the manner
in which substances are moved in and out of the cell. This property also helps
the cell to detect changes in the environment.

Study Question 2

Explain how variation of temperature and pH is likely to affect the normal
functioning of the cell membrane.


--- Page 27 ---

4.3 Physiological Processes

= YY Close with thumb Femone Giese
One major function of the cell membrane is its ability to control the movement
of substances into and out of the cell. This function is achieved through

physiological processes that include diffusion, osmosis and active transport.
4.3 (a) Diffusion |

Particles in a gas or a liquid are constantly moving freely, bumping into each L
other and bouncing off randomly. As this occurs, the molecules move from a
region of high concentration to a region of low concentration. This results in
the particles being evenly spread out in the space available. The process by
which particles move from a region of high concentration to a region of
low concentration is known as diffusion.

For example, the scent of a flower experienced by an individual is as a
result of diffusion of particles of the scent from the source.

Practical Activity 1

7 Pout in water
‘

To demonstrate diffusion using potassium manganate (VII)

t it
mn
tl

Requirements

it

1

Potassium manganate (VII) crystals, glass tubing, 100 cm? beaker and water.

Procedure

1. Hold a glass tubing vertically in a beaker so that one end of the tubing Higy 2.8 lash thee hegionting

rests flat on the bottom of the beaker.

2. Cautiously and quickly drop a crystal of potassium manganate (VII)

through the upper opening of the glass tubing.

. Close the upper end of the glass tubing with the thumb.

. Half-fill the beaker with water.

5. Carefully withdraw vertically the glass tubing so that the crytstal is left
undisturbed at the bottom of the beaker. See figure 4.2.

6. Record your observations for the first 15 minutes.

7. Explain your observations.

Hw

Fig. 4.3 (b): At the end

From the demonstration, you notedthat after some time, the purple colour
of the potassium manganate (VII) spread throughout the water and eventually


--- Page 28 ---

all the water turned purple. ‘The explanation for this observation is that in the
crystals, the particles of potassium manganate (VII) are very concentrated. The
potassium manganate (VII) particles break away from the crystals, dissolve in
water and then diffuse through the water until they are evenly distributed. See
figure 4.3 (a) and (b). The difference in concentration of particles between the
region of high concentration and the region of low concentration is known as
the diffusion gradient.

Role of Diffusion in Living Organisms

(a) Absorption of Materials

In plants, many salts dissolve in soil water to form ions which are small enough
in size to pass through the pores of cell membranes of root cells.

This process will take place when the concentration of ions is higher in
the soil water than in the root hair cells. Digested foods, for example amino
acids and glucose, diffuse across the wall of the ileum into the blood for
transport to other parts of the animal body.

(b) Gaseous Exchange in Plants and Animals

(i) Plants take in carbon (IV) oxide and give out oxygen in the presence of
sunlight during photosynthesis. Some of the oxygen is used in
respiration and the excess is given out. At night only respiration takes
place and therefore, plants take in oxygen and give out carbon (IV)
oxide as a waste product. These gases pass in and out of plants through
stomata in leaves and lenticels in stems by diffusion.

(ii) In animals, several structures are used as surfaces of gaseous exchange
through diffusion. These are gills, skins, tracheal system and lungs.
‘These structures provide large surfaces for gaseous exchange. In
animals where blood is used for transport, respiratory gases oxygen and
carbon (IV) oxide, move in and out of body tissues by diffusion.

(iii) Excretion of nitrogenous wastes.

(iv) Diffusion is one of the mechanisms involved in the transport of
manufactured food from leaves to other parts of the plant.

Study Question 3

(a) What is the significance of diffusion to plant pollination?
(b) Is diffusion an energy-driven process? Explain.

Factors Affecting Diffusion
(a) Diffusion Gradient

A greater diffusion gradient between two points increases rate of diffusion.
Increasing concentration of diffusing molecules also increases diffusion gra-
dient with corresponding regions hence increases diffusion rate.

(b) Surface Area to Volume Ratio

The rate of diffusion in and out of a body depends on surface area to volume
ratio. The higher the ratio, the greater the rate of diffusion and the lower the
ratio, the less diffusion takes place. This implies that small organisms expose a
large surface area to the surrounding when compared to big organisms. The
relationship is illustrated in table 4.1. Therefore, small organisms depend on
diffusion as a means of transport of foods, respiratory gases and waste products.
Large organisms, in addition to diffusion have transport systems to increase
the efficiency of diffusion.

(c) Thickness of Membranes and Tissues

The thicker the membrane or tissue, the lower the rate of diffusion. This is
because the distance to be covered by the diffusing molecules is greater.
However, if the membrane is thinner, the rate of diffusion is higher.

(d) Size of Molecules
Small and light molecules diffuse faster than large and heavy molecules.
(e) Temperature

An increase in temperature increases the energy content in molecules and this
causes them to move faster. Hence, an increase in temperature increases rate
of diffusion while decreases in temperature decreases the rate of diffusion.

Table 4.1: Relationship between surface area and volume


--- Page 29 ---

Surface Area to Volume ratio

Surface Area | Volume
cn” cm

3

| 6:1 = 6:1

216:216= 1:1]

$64:1728 = 1:2

4,3 (b) Osmosis

Osmosis is a special type of diffusion which involves a semi-permeable mem-
brane. This process can be demonstrated using a visking tubing. Visking tubing
is a commercial synthetic transparent semi-permeable membrane.

Practical Activity 2
To demonstrate osmosis using a visking tubing

Requirements

A 500 cm® beaker, a piece of visking tubing 8 cm long, a piece of thread 30 cm

long, glass rod, concentrated sugar solution and 500 cm? distilled water.

Procedure

1. Into the beaker, put 350 cm? of the distilled water.

2. Dip the visking tubing in water to moisten it. Open the visking tubing and
tie one end with the thread provided.

3. Half-fill the visking tubing with the sugar solution provided and then tie
the open end of the tubing. Ensure no sugar solution spills out of the
tubing.

4. Immerse the visking tubing into the distilled water in the beaker and
suspend it using the glass rod provided as shown in figure 4.4.

5. Leave the set up for about 30 minutes.

6. Record your observation.

7. Explain the observations made.

Half filled visking
tubing with sugar
solution

bid
Pit

l
a
iJ it if

Distilled water

Fig. 4.4: Demonstration of osmosis

From the demonstration you have carried out, you observed that the visking
tubing became swollen as a result of increase in its contents. See figure 4.5 a)
and (b).


--- Page 30 ---

Thread to suspend
the visking tube

ett!

Visking tube
containing sugar or

|
Ae
Lite

Visking tube
increased in volume

Fig. 4.5 (b): At the end
What explanation did you give for your observation?

Since the visking tubing contains both water and sugar molecules, it can safely
be assumed that the beaker contains a higher concentration of water molecules
than the visking tubing. The water molecules have therefore, diffused from a
higher concentration to a lower concentration, that is, into the visking tubing
and thereby increasing its contents. Besides, the wall of the visking tubing
allowed only the small water molecules, to pass through but not the large sugar
molecules. The membrane is therefore, said to be semi-permeable. See figure
4.6.

The process where the solvent molecules (water) move from a lowly con-
centrated (dilute) solution to a highly concentrated solution across a semi-
permeable membrane is known as osmosis. The movement of solvent mole-

cules may continue until the two separate solution achieve the same concen-
tration. Such solutions are described as isotonic. A lowly concentrated solution
(dilute) is described as hypotonic because it has less of the solute molecules,
but more of the solvent molecules. A highly concentrated solution on the other
hand, can be described as hypertonic because it has more of solute molecules
but less of solvent molecules.

Osmosis can also be described as a special type of diffusion because it
involves the movement of solvent (water) molecules from their region of high
concentration to region of low concentration across a semi-permeable mem-
brane.

In practical activity 2 you have demonstrated that osmosis occurs in a
non-living material, the visking tubing. In the next activity you will investigate
osmosis in a living tissue.

Distilled water Sugar solution

Water molecules
Sugar molecules

o (2 8)
Pore in the semi-permeable Oo

membrane

0

Direction of movement of
water molecules

0)
‘ &
= Semi-permeable
, 0 - O membrane

Fig. 4.6: Osmosis through a semi-permeable membrane
Study Question 4

(a) Distinguish between osmosis and diffusion.
(b) Name the solvent molecules involved in osmosis.


--- Page 31 ---

Practical Activity 3
To investigate Osmosis in potato tissue

Requirements

Cork borer 0.5 cm diameter, scapel or sharp razor blade, distilled water, ruler,
Irish potato, strong sugar solution, tissue paper and two boiling tubes.

Procedure

1. Push a cork borer through a large potato tuber and remove the cylinder of
tissue from the borer. Repeat this to obtain another five cylinders.

2. Chip off one end of each cylinder as shown in figure 4.7.

3. Starting from the chipped end, measure exactly 50 mm length and cut the
cylinder. Repeat this for the other five cylinders. Consider the firmness
and flexibility of cylinders.

4, Place three cylinders in a boiling tube containing distilled water and the
other three cylinders in the other boiling tube containing a strong solution
of sugar. Leave them for 40 minutes.

5. Remove the cylinders and mop them up with the tissue paper.

6. Measure and record the length of each cylinder from each boiling tube.
Record your results in the format shown in table 4.2.

7. Explain the differences in the average length of the potato cylinders.

Table 4.2: Osmosis in potato tissue

o—>o-4-

50 mm

—

50 mm

Average change
in length

Cylinders in boiling
tube with sugar solution

Initial length
of cylinders

Final length
of cylinders

Average
length

Cylinders in boiling
tube with distilled water

Fig. 4.7: How to make potato cylinders
Osmotic Pressure

When a concentrated solution is separated from distilled water by a semi-
permeable membrane, the solution develops a force with which it draws water
through the semi-permeable membrane from the distilled water. On the other
hand, a pressure can be applied against the semi-permeable membrane to stop
water molecules from the distilled water entering the concentrated solution or
to stop osmosis from taking place. ‘This pressure is referred to as osmotic
pressure. The osmotic pressure of a solution is measured by an instrument
called osmometer.

Osmotic Potential

Osmotic potential is the hidden pressure of a concentrated solution that only
becomes real when the solution is separated from distilled water by a semi-
permeable membrane. It is a measure of the pressure a solution would develop
to withdraw water molecules from pure water when separated by a semi-
permeable membrane.

Water Relations in Animals

The cell membrane of animal cells is semi-permeable just like the visking
tubing, dialysis tubing or cellophane. The cytoplasm contains dissolved salts
and sugars in solution form. If an animal cell, for example a red blood cell, is
placed in distilled water or hypotonic solution, there would be a net flow of
water into the cell by osmosis.

The cell would swell up and eventually burst. The cell membrane is weak
and is not as strong and as firm as the additional cellulose cell wall found in
plant cells. The cellulose cell wall in plants prevents the outward pressure and
eventually prevents the cell from bursting. The bursting of the red blood cell is


--- Page 32 ---

Practical Activity 3
To investigate Osmosis in potato tissue

Requirements

Cork borer 0.5 cm diameter, scapel or sharp razor blade, distilled water, ruler,
Irish potato, strong sugar solution, tissue paper and two boiling tubes.

Procedure

1. Push a cork borer through a large potato tuber and remove the cylinder of
tissue from the borer. Repeat this to obtain another five cylinders.

2. Chip off one end of each cylinder as shown in figure 4.7.

3. Starting from the chipped end, measure exactly 50 mm length and cut the
cylinder. Repeat this for the other five cylinders. Consider the firmness
and flexibility of cylinders.

4. Place three cylinders in a boiling tube containing distilled water and the
other three cylinders in the other boiling tube containing a strong solution
of sugar. Leave them for 40 minutes.

5. Remove the cylinders and mop them up with the tissue paper.

6. Measure and record the length of each cylinder from each boiling tube.
Record your results in the format shown in table 4.2.

7. Explain the differences in the average length of the potato cylinders.

Table 4.2: Osmosis in potato tissue

Final length
of cylinders

Average change
in length

Cylinders in boiling
tbe with sugar solution

Initial length
of cylinders

Average
length

Cylinders in boiling
tube with distilled water.

Fig. 4.7: How to make potato cylinders
Osmotic Pressure

When a concentrated solution is separated from distilled water by a semi-
permeable membrane, the solution develops a force with which it draws water
through the semi-permeable membrane from the distilled water. On the other
hand, a pressure can be applied against the semi-permeable membrane to stop
water molecules from the distilled water entering the concentrated solution or
to stop osmosis from taking place. This pressure is referred to as osmotic
pressure. The osmotic pressure of a solution is measured by an instrument
called osmometer.

Osmotic Potential

Osmotic potential is the hidden pressure of a concentrated solution that only
becomes real when the solution is separated from distilled water by a semi-
permeable membrane. It is a measure of the pressure a solution would develop
to withdraw water molecules from pure water when separated by a semi-
permeable membrane.

Water Relations in Animals

The cell membrane of animal cells is semi-permeable just like the visking
tubing, dialysis tubing or cellophane. The cytoplasm contains dissolved salts
and sugars in solution form. If an animal cell, for example a red blood cell, is
placed in distilled water or hypotonic solution, there would be a net flow of
water into the cell by osmosis.

The cell would swell up and eventually burst. The cell membrane is weak
and is not as strong and as firm as the additional cellulose cell wall found in
plant cells. The cellulose cell wall in plants prevents the outward pressure and
eventually prevents the cell from bursting. The bursting of the red blood cell is


--- Page 33 ---

known as haemolysis. If a similar red blood cell is placed in a hypertonic
solution then water would be drawn out of the cell by osmosis. The cells would
shrink by a process called crenation. See figure 4.8(a) and (b).

‘This behaviour of red blood cells placed in various concentrations of solution
indicates that body fluids and the blood plasma surrounding the cells must be
kept at the same concentration (i.e. isotonic) as that which is found inside the
cells. If this is not done, the cells will either gain water and burst or lose water
and shrink and their functions will be impaired. The body has a mechanism
of keeping these concentrations constant within a narrow range.

4.3 (c) Water Relations in Plants

A plant cell has both a cellulose cell wall and cell membrane. ‘The centre of the
cell contains a vacuole with sap. The sap is a solution of salts and sugar and is
bound by a membrane called tonoplast. The cell membrane and tonoplast are
semi-permeable while the cellulose cell wall is fully permeable thus allowing
solutes and water to pass through freely. If a plant cell is placed in water or
hypotonic solution, the water will move into the cell by osmosis and cause the
cell to distend. The cellulose cell wall is rigid and does not allow cells to burst
as in animal cells. As the cell gains more water, its vacuole enlarges and exerts
an outward pressure on the cell wall called turgor pressure. This pressure
increases as more water is taken into the vacuole which pushes the cytoplasm
against the cell wall until the cell wall cannot stretch any more. The cell becomes
firm or rigid and is said to be turgid. When the cell wall is being stretched
towards the outside, it develops a resistant pressure to stretching that is equal
and opposite to turgor pressure called wall pressure. These processes are
illustrated in figure 4.9.

Placed in hypotonic
solution €.g water

The cell membrane

A fed blood ce!! bursts 6. haemotyses

The cell swetlsas water
is drawn in by osmosis

(a) Haemolysis in red blood cells

ee)

The cell membrane
bursts Le. becomes
crenated

A ted blood cell

The cell membrane shrinks as
water |S drawn out of tha cell
by CSMoOsIS

ib) Crenation

Fig. 4.8: Haemolysis and crenation in a red blood cell

When a plant cell is placed in a hypertonic solution, water molecules move out
of the cell into the solution by osmosis. As the water moves out of the cell, the
cell starts to shrink, becomes less rigid or flabby and is said to be flaccid. If the
cell continues to lose more water, its contents reduce in size and the plasma
membrane pulls away from the cell wall towards the centre. The process by
which plant cells lose water, shrink and become flaccid is called plasmolysis.
Plasmolysis can be reversed when a flaccid cell is placed in distilled water and
this process is called deplasmolysis.

Study Question 5

A student at Kondele Secondary School observed that when sodium chloride
was poured onto grass, the grass dried up. Explain this observation in relation
to osmosis.


--- Page 34 ---

Turged cell

Call placed in water

Key

1. Disoived salts and sugars in cell sap

2. Water entering the cell

3. Call sap becomes turgid and exerts
tugol pressure

Normal f
plantcell jj >

— a

> Solution
si. \_1__ Cell membrane
es 920 , se = = Ceil vacuole

Fi ms => == =

Plasmolysed cell

Cell placed in a
hypertonic solution

1. Solution outside the cell

2. Water leaving the cell

3. Cell membrane pulls oft trom
cell wail

Fig. 4.9: Turgor and plasmolysis in a plant cell
Practical Activity 4

To examine the effects of osmosis on living cells

Requirements

Microscope, microscope slides, coverslips, dropper, pair of forceps, blotting
paper, common salt solution and onion bulb.

Procedure

1. Put two drops of water on a clean microscope slide using a dropper.

2. Using a pair of forceps, carefully remove a piece of onion epidermis and
place it on the drop of water on the slide. Cover with a coverslip.

3. Using a blotting paper, drain the excess water from the slide.

4. Observe under low and medium power objective lenses and make a large
clear drawing of one of the cells.

5. Add three drops of salt solution to the left-hand side edge of the coverslip.

6. Hold a piece of blotting paper on the other side of the cover slip to draw
the salt solution under the coverslip.

7. Observe the cells under the microscope after some time for about three
minutes. Make another drawing of the observation.

8. Explain your observation of the epidermal cells observed in water and salt
solution.

Wilting

Plants lose water to the atmosphere through transpiration and evaporation.
‘The cells in the plants lose water and draw more from the soil. It reaches a time
when the rate of water loss to the atmosphere is more than that of absorption
from the soil. Turgor in cells is reduced while cells shrink and the plant droops.
This phenomenon is observed in plants on hot and dry days and is called
wilting. At night, plants recover from wilting because their stomata are closed
and rates of both evaporation and transpiration are reduced. However, if water

supply from the soil is inadequate, the plants do not recover from wilting and
are said to have undergone permanent wilting.

Study Question 6

(a) Distinguish between plasmolysis and wilting.
(b) Explain how wilting assists plants to reduce excessive water loss to the
atmosphere.

Role of Osmosis in Organisms

(a) Absorption of water from the soil

Root hair cells of a plant absorb water from the soil by osmosis. This same
process (osmosis) also helps in water distribution from cell to cell in the body.

(b) Support

Water taken into cells increases cell turgor hence, cells become firm or rigid
and therefore gain support. This type of support is important in seedlings,
leaves and herbaceous plants which are less woody.

(c) Opening and closing of stomata

The guard cells synthesise glucose through the process of photosynthesis in
the presence of light. As glucose accumulates in the guard cells, their osmotic
pressure increases and this enables them to draw water from adjacent cells by
osmosis. This action results in the guard cells becoming turgid causing the
opening of stomata. The opening of the stomata allows gaseous exchange to
take place. At night the guard cells do not photosynthesise and therefore,
glucose level goes down leading to lowering of osmotic pressure. The guard
cells lose turgidity and therefore, the stomata closes.


--- Page 35 ---

(d) Feeding in Insectivorous Plants

These are plants that trap insects using special structures that suddenly change
their turgor pressure when disturbed. The change in turgor pressure enables
the special structures such as leaves to close trapping insects which are digested
to provide amino acids.

(e) Osmoregulation

In kidney tubules of animals, water is withdrawn from the tubules through the
tubular walls through osmosis. The water finds its way into the surrounding
blood capillaries. This helps the animal to regulate its body osmotic pressure.

Factors affecting Osmosis

(a) Concentration of Solutions and Concentration Gradient

Osmosis is greater in solutions that have greater differences in osmotic
pressure. The greater the concentration gradient between two points, the
greater the speed of osmosis.

(b) Certain factors that increase rate of diffusion also increase rate of
osmosis provided they do not destroy the semi-permeable membrane.
Such includes temperature.

4.3 (d) Active Transport

Diffusion and osmosis do not account for the transport of all substances across
cell membranes. Substances such as amino acids, sugar and many ions do not
easily diffuse across cell membranes even if their concentration on one side is
greater than on the other side. Other substances, although able to diffuse across
cell membranes, do not meet the requirement of the cells. Active transport is
a process that moves these substances across the cell membranes and against
a concentration gradient. The process requires energy to move these sub-
stances across the cell membrane.

It is suggested that there are carriers on cell membranes which combine
with substances being transported, and then move them from one side of the
membrane to the other. It is by active transport that sea-weeds take up large
quantities of iodine from their surrounding sea water and accumulate it in
their tissues at a higher concentration than the sea water. It is important to
note that cellular intake of solutes is largely dependent on active transport.

Role of Active Transport

(a) Reabsorption of sugars and some salts by the kidney. Useful substances
are reabsorbed back into the blood stream from the kidney tubules by
active transport.

(b) Absorption of some mineral salts from the soil by roots.

(c) Absorption of digested food from alimentary canal of animals into the
blood stream.

(d) Accumulation of substances into the body to offset osmotic imbalance
in arid and saline environments.

(e) Excretion of waste products from body cells.

Study Question 7

(a) What is the significance of active transport in plants?
(b) Distinguish between osmosis and active transport.

Factors Affecting Active Transport

Any factor that affects energy production influences the rate of active transport.
Such factors include oxygen concentration, change in pH, glucose concentra-
tion, enzyme inhibitors and temperature.

Revision Questions

1. (a) What type of membrane is the visking tubing?
(a) How does a visking tubing differ from a cell membrane?
2. Explain the following terms:
(a) diffusion
(b) osmosis
(c) active transport
(d) plasmolysis.
3. How would you make a flaccid cell turgid?
4. In what ways are the properties of the cell membrane affected by:
(a) temperature?
(b) strong acid?
5. Name the method by which molecules like amino acids and glucose enter
a cell.
6. Explain the differences between:
(a) turgor pressure and wall pressure.
(b) osmotic pressure and osmotic potential.
7. How would you demonstrate the process of diffusion using a bottle
containing perfume?


--- Page 36 ---

8.

9.

Name two plant and two animal processes in which diffusion plays an
important role.

How is the rate of diffusion affected by:

(a) temperature?

(b) concentration?

(c) surface area to volume ratio?

10. The following experiment was set up to demonstrate the water relations

of plant cells. Two tubes x and y made of visking tubing were filled with
different liquids and placed in a beaker containing a certain liquid, see
fig. 4.10.

It was found that after 20 minutes, visking tubing x felt hard and the
amount of liquid in it had increased. Visking tubing y was soft and con-
tained less liquid as shown in figure 4.10.

Fig. 4.10

1

—

12

(a) Explain what took place in visking tubings x and y.
(b) (i) Identify which liquid is hypotonic to the liquid in the beaker.
(ii) Use (b) above to explain the meaning of hypotonic and
hypertonic solutions.

. Four equal strips A, B, C and D were cut from a potato whose cell was

28.5% of sugar. The strips were placed in sugar solutions of different
concentrations as follows: A 10%, B 15%, C 25% and D 35%

(i) What changes would you expect in strips A and D?

(ii) Account for the changes in A and D above.

. An experiment was set up in a laboratory as shown in figure 4.11

N
Distilled water Sodium chioride

Yili Distilled water

L— Sodium chloride :
hi

a Visking tubing or

__ Visking tubing or one Se et dialysing tube
dialysing tube es ode

Fig. 4.11

(i) What will happen to the visking tubing in M and N after two
hours?
(ii) Explain the observation made in M.
(iii) What does a visking tubing correspond to in a living organism?
13. A group of students set up an experiment to investigate a certain
physiological process. The set-up was as shown in the figure 4.12.

M N

String Distilled water sting esos chloride

i
'

Vite. Distilled water

jet e tut Visking tubing or
— Visking tubing oF =e pele ae Gialysing tube
dialysing tube Ys tate

Fig. 4.12

After some time, the students observed that the level of the sugar solution had

risen.

(a) What physiological process was being investigated?

(b) Account for the rise in the level of sugar solution in the experiment.

(c) Suggest the results that the students would obtain if they repeated the
experiment using a piece of boiled pawpaw.


--- Page 37 ---

CHAPTER FIVE

Nutrition in Plants and Animals

5.1 Introduction

All living organisms require food to sustain life. Food is also required for
carrying out metabolic activities such as respiration and growth and repair of
worn out tissues in living organisms. The process by which organisms obtain
nutrients and assimilate them is referred to as nutrition. The modes of
nutrition differ depending on the type of organism. Both Autotrophism and
Heterotrophism are modes of nutrition that have been identified among the
organisms.

Autotrophism is a mode of nutrition in which the living organism
manufactures its own complex food substances from simple substances. These
simple substances are carbon (IV) oxide (carbon dioxide), water, light or
chemical energy. The simple substances are obtained from the immediate
environment. Living orga-nisms that make their own food are known as
autotrophs.

Heterotrophism is a mode of nutrition that involves taking complex food
materials such as carbohydrates, proteins and fats obtained from bodies of
plants and animals. Organisms that feed on these already synthesised foods
are called heterotrophs.

5.2 Autotrophism

(a) Autotrophism is a process by which some plants manufacture food sub-
stances such as carbohydrates from simple substances such as carbon (IV)
oxide and water. Where sunlight is used as a source of energy, the process is
referred to as photosynthesis. Photo means light while synthesis means to
make. Some non-green plants obtain energy for making food from oxidation
of chemicals. Their process of making food is therefore, known as
chemosynthesis.

As a result of photosynthesis, food substances such as carbohydrates,
proteins and fats are formed. Plants are therefore, the primary producers and
animals directly or indirectly depend on them as a source of food. Therefore,
it can be concluded that the process of photosynthesis involves the conversion
of light energy into a form that can be utilised by all living organisms.

During the process of photosynthesis, carbon (IV) oxide from the
atmospheric air is used. Oxygen is given out and released in to the atmospheric
air as a by-product. Animals and plants use oxygen from the atmosphere for
respiration. They release carbon (IV) oxide as one of the products of respiration.
This way, photosynthesis helps to maintain the level of these two gases fairly
constant in the atmosphere.

The process of photosynthesis occurs in green plants, mainly in the leaves.
In order to understand the process of photosynthesis, it is necessary to study
the external and internal structure of the leaf.

(a) External Structure of a Leaf

A leaf is a thin flattened organ which is attached to the stem or a branch of
green plants. A typical simple leaf consists of a flattened surface called lamina.
The lamina is green in colour and contains the photosynthetic tissue. In
dicotyledonous plants, simple leaves have a thick midrib which runs in the
middle. From the midrib arises small veins that run into the lamina forming
an extensive network of veins. In monocotyledonous plants, the midrib is
absent but small veins run parallel to each other.

In some plants, the leaf is attached to the stem or branch by a petiole
while in others the leaf is attached directly. In some monocotyledons, some
leaves are attached to the stem by the leaf sheath. See figure 5.1.

Leaf apex

Leaf margin

Midrid

Leaf vein

Fig. 5.1 (a): External features of a dicotyledonous leaf, e.g., Bean


--- Page 38 ---

Practical Activity 1

To examine the external features of a dicotyledonous and
monocoty-ledonous leaf

Requirements

A hand lens, dictoyledonous leaf e.g. bean, hibiscus, monocotyledonous leaf
e.g. maize, napier grass or tradescantia.

Procedure

1. Take one dicotyledonous leaf. Notice the smooth shiny upper surface due
to the waxy cuticle layer covering it. Compare the upper and lower
surface. Which one is less shiny? What is the reason for this?

2. Study the venation (arrangement of veins) of the leaf. Observe the thick
mid-rib and the finer veins branching off from it.

Leaf apex

Leaf margin

Parallel veins

Sheath

Siem

Fig. 5.1 (b): External features of a monocotyledonous leaf, e.g., Zebrina

3. Repeat the same observations using the monocotyledonous leaf. What
differences do you notice in leaf surfaces and venation?

Study Question 1

(a) What can you say about the surface area of the lamina in practical
activity 1 above? Give a reason for your answer.

(b) Why is the leaf thin?

(c) Make a drawing of the two types of leaves and label the lamina, petiole,
veins, leaf sheath and leaf margin.

(b) Internal Structure of a Leaf

A transverse section of the leaf, examined under a light microscope reveals the
internal structures shown in figure 5.2. The following is a description of the
structure and functions of the parts labelled below.

Cuticle

This is a thin non-cellular, waxy, waterproof and transparent layer that coats
the upper and lower surfaces of the leaf. It reduces excessive loss of water and
protects the inner tissues of the leaf from mechanical damage. It also prevents
entry of disease-causing micro-organisms. The cuticle is transparent. It allows
penetration of light for photosynthesis.

Epidermis

‘This is a thin tissue, usually one cell thick, on the upper and lower surfaces of
the leaf. The epidermal cells have no chloroplasts except the guard cells.
Chloroplasts are the organelles that contain the photosynthetic material known

as chlorophyll. The epidermis secretes the cuticle and also protects the inner
tissues from mechanical damage and entry of disease-causing microorganisms.

epidermis eee hse,
Palisade i 1 bitsy a3 17 jy Y

mesophyll i iy eh | ki | by Bi | © ly
aR A Fl ae

ca e*.
HPD
. ~= ==
a oe Ss
i.
ere
: + >
re
:

=. an

a

Guard cell
Fig. 5.2: Transverse section of a leaf

The guard cells are special bean-shaped epidermal cells, mostly found on
the lower surface of the leaf. Unlike the adjacent epidermal cells, guard cells
contain chloroplasts and are able to carry out the process of photosynthesis.



--- Page 39 ---

They control the opening and closing of the stoma. They also control water
loss. Through the stomata, air moves in and out of the leaf.

Palisade Layer

This is a layer of cells located beneath the upper epidermis. It consists of
cylindrical shaped cells closely packed together and with the long axis perpen-
dicular to the surface. They have numerous chloroplasts containing chlorophyll
which is necessary for photosynthesis. Their position and arrangement enables
them to receive maximum sunlight.

Spongy Mesophyll Layer

‘This is a layer of cells between the palisade and the lower epidermis. The cells
are irregularly shaped and loosely arranged creating large air spaces in between
them. The air spaces provide communication pathways through which gases
diffuse in between the cells. Unlike the palisade cells, these cells contain fewer
chloroplasts. This explains why the lower surface of the leaf is lighter in colour
than the upper surface.

Leaf Veins

The leaf has an extensive system of veins which ensures that every cell is close
to the supply of materials. Each vein is a vascular bundle which consists of
xylem and phloem tissues. Through the xylem, water and mineral salts are
conducted from the roots to the leaf cells while manufactured food is translo-
cated through the phloem from the leaf cells to the rest of the plant.

Study Question 2
Name three cells in a leaf which contain chloroplasts.

Summary of the Adaptations of the leaf to its Photosynthetic
function

Leaves posses special structural features which enable them to carry out the

process of photosynthesis efficiently. The structural features include the fol-

lowing:

(i) Broad flat lamina provides a large surface area for the absorption of
carbon (IV) oxide and sunlight.

(ii) ‘The thinness of the leaf allows light and carbon (IV) oxide to pass
through a short distance to reach the photosynthetic cells.

(iii) The presence of stomata ensures efficient diffusion of carbon (IV) oxide
into the leaf.

(iv) The cuticle and epidermis are transparent enough to allow penetration
of light to the palisade cells.

(v) The palisade cells contain large numbers of chloroplasts, and their
arrangement and location next to the upper epidermis enables them to
receive maximum sunlight.

(vi) The existence of extensive veins which conduct water and mineral salts
to the photosynthetic cells and removes the products of photosynthesis.

A egal aes
Plate 5.1: Photograph of leaf mosaic

(vii) The air spaces in the spongy mesophyll layer are large enough to allow
gases to circulate easily.

(viii) The regular arrangement of leaves on the stem minimises overlapping
and overshadowing. ‘This is called leaf mosaic. See Plate 5.1.

(c) The Chloroplasts

These are disc-shaped organelles found in the cytoplasm of some plant cells.
Each chloroplast is bound by a double unit membrane: the outer and inner
membranes. Internally, the chloroplast consist of layers of membranes known
as lamellae suspended in an aqueous matrix called stroma. The lamellae may
at certain intervals form several layers of membranes grouped together to
make a granum (plural — grana). See figure 5.3.

Chlorophyll molecules and other photosynthetic pigments are located in
the granum which provides a large surface area to accommodate a large number
of chlorophyll molecules. Chlorophyll molecules absorb light energy which is
necessary for photosynthesis to take place. The stroma contain enzymes that
speeds up the process of photosynthesis.


--- Page 40 ---

Outer membrane

inner membrane

Starch grain

— Stroma
Fat lipid droplets

intergrana

Fig. 5.3: Section through a chloroplast
Practical Activity 2
To observe distribution of stomata

Requirements

Leaves of zebrina, Tradescantia or kales (sukuma wiki) microscope, microscope
slides, a pair of forceps, water, a dropper and coverslip.

Light energy
and
chlorophyll
Carbon (IV) oxide + Water ————————- Glucose
(simple
carbohydrate )
6H,0 ————_* CB,.0, +

6CO, +

Procedure

1. Obtain a leaf of the plant and cut the leaf across.

2. Using the pair of forceps, obtain a thin epidermis from the lower surface
of the leaf.

3. Mount this on the microscope slide, add a drop of water and then place a
coverslip.

4. Place the slide on the stage and observe under low power and medium
power objective lenses.

5. Identify the guard cells and the normal epidermal cells.

6. Identify the stoma in between the guard cells. Count the number of
stomata observed in the field of view.

7. Repeat the procedure for the upper surface of the leaf.
Study Question 3

(a) Explain how chloroplasts are adapted to their photosynthetic functions.

(b) List three adaptations of leaves that maximise efficiency in trapping
sunlight for photosynthesis.

(d) The process of Photosynthesis

The raw materials for photosynthesis are water and carbon (IV) oxide gas. For
the process to take place, it requires the presence of light and chlorophyll
pigment. As mentioned earlier, the process of photosynthesis occurs in the
chloroplasts. Water and carbon (IV) oxide molecules undergo several chemical
processes in the presence of sunlight to form carbohydrates and oxygen is
given out as a by-product. The process can be summarised using a general
equation represented below in the boxed text above.

‘This process is however, more complex than what is represented in the simple
series of equations given above. It involves chemical reactions that can be
outlined in two general stages. These are the light stage and the dark stage.

The Light stage (Light Dependent Stage)

‘This is the initial stage in the process of photosynthesis. It occurs in the grana
of the chloroplasts. The chlorophyll molecule absorbs light energy which is
used to split water molecules into oxygen and hydrogen atoms. This process is
called photolysis of water and is shown below.

Light energy
2H,O—__* 4H + 0,
Chlorophyll
Water ____» Hydrogen atom + Oxygen
The hydrogen atoms that are produced by the splitting of water enter the dark
stage while oxygen is released to the atmosphere or used by the plant for
respiration. Some of the solar energy absorbed by chlorophyll molecules is
used in the formation of energy-rich Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP) which
is later used in the dark stage. This reaction involves conversion of light energy
to chemical energy.

The Dark Stage (Light Independent Stage)

This is the second stage of the process of photosynthesis. It proceeds whether
light is present or not. This process involves combination of carbon (IV) oxide
with hydrogen atoms to form simple sugar such as glucose. This process is


--- Page 41 ---

known as carbon (IV) oxide fixation which involves a series of enzyme
controlled reactions in the box. The equation below is a summary of Carbon
(IV) oxide fixation. The energy required for this reaction is provided by ATP
from light stage reaction.

‘The intermediate product (CH,O),, undergoes further reactions to form simple

sugars such as glucose. Some of the glucose formed is directly utilised by the
plant cells while the rest is converted to starch and stored in the plant. In
addition to glucose, fatty acids and amino acids are also formed in the dark
stage of photosynthesis.

Study Question 4

(a) What is the importance of light dependent reaction in the process of
photosynthesis?
(b) What are the products of the light independent stage in photosynthesis?

Practical Activity 3

To investigate the presence of starch in a leaf

This activity aims at investigating the presence or absence of starch in a leaf. If
a positive result is desired, then the leaf must be exposed to light for sometime
in order to allow the process of photosynthesis to proceed.

‘The test-leaf must be killed by dipping it in boiling water. The dead leaf
should then be decolourised by boiling it in methylated spirit. A water bath
should be used to avoid igniting the highly flammable methylated spirit. The
leaf is softened by dipping it in warm water.

Requirements

Water, dropper, beaker, source of heat, boiling tube, a leaf and petri dish or
white tile.

Carbon IV oxide + Hydrogen ——————® Simple carbohydrate + Water

4(H)

co, +

———+» (CH,O), + HO

Procedure

1. Obtain a leaf that has been exposed to light for at least 5 hours.
2. Boil water in a beaker.
3. Dip the leaf in the boiling water for 3 to 4 minutes.

4. Put the leaf in a boiling tube containing methylated spirit and stand the
tube in the beaker containing boiling water (water bath) for about 10
minutes to decolourise the leaf.

CAUTION: Methylated spirit is highly flammable, avoid direct heating.
5. Remove the leaf from the test-tube and wash it in hot water in the beaker.
6. Spread the leaf in a petri-dish and add drops of dilute iodine solution.
Observe and record the colour changes.

Note. A blue-black colour indicates presence of starch.
Study Question 5

Explain why:
(a) it was necessary to use a leaf that had been exposed to light for a few
hours.
(b) the fresh leaf was dipped in boiling water.
(c) the leaf was decolourised.
(d) the methylated spirit was boiled indirectly.
(e) Factors Affecting the Rate of Photosynthesis

The main factors which affect the rate of photosynthesis are light intensity,
carbon (IV) oxide concentration, temperature and water. Each of these factors
are discussed below.

Light Intensity

Light intensity varies from day-to-day and from place to place. On a bright
sunny day, plants photosynthesise faster than on a dull cloudy day. The rate of
photosynthesis increases linearly as the light intensity increases, up to a certain
level when it slows down and finally levels off. Very bright sunshine may
actually damage plants because of high amount of ultra-violet light.

It is important to note that the quality of light also affects the rate of photosyn-
thesis. Most of the plants require red and blue wave-lengths of light for photo-
synthesis. Plants growing in the shade receive low quantities and poor qualities
of light which slows the process of photosynthesis. See figure 5.4.


--- Page 42 ---

————————

aa

|
|
!
|
!
'
|
|
|
!

@
8
=
; =
—
g
2
a.
rs)
£
o
i

| Range of
|

optimum light
| idensity
|

1...
Light intensity

Fig. 5.4: Effect of light on the rate of photosynthesis
Carbon (IV) oxide Concentration

The amount of carbon (IV) oxide in the atmosphere is about 0.03% and does
not vary very much. Under controlled conditions like a green house, an increase
in carbon (IV) oxide concentration results in a linear increase in the rate of
photosynthesis up to a certain level when it slows down and finally levels off
as shown in figure 5.5.

Rate of photosynthesis

% Carbon IV oxide

Fig. 5.5: Effect of carbon (IV) oxide on the rate of photosynthesis
Temperature

Photosynthesis is a process controlled by enzymes. Enzyme-controlled reac-
tions are affected by temperature changes. At low temperature, the rate of
photosynthesis is low. A rise in temperature by 10°C results in the doubling of
the rate of photosynthesis up to about 40°C. Further increase of temperature
decreases the rate sharply and finally stops. This is because the excess heat
destroys the enzymes which are responsible for the chemical reactions. Figure
5.6 graphically summarises this information.

/ rt Range of optimum

/ | temperature

Temperature change in centigrade

Rate of photosynthesis

Fig. 5.6: Effect of temperature on photosynthesis

For each factor considered, the rate of photosynthesis increases up to the point
where it levels off. At this point, there is a limiting factor. For example, where
the graph levels off for carbon (IV) oxide, the limiting factor may be light
intensity. If this were increased, the rate of photosynthesis would increase
beyond the plateau.

Water

Plants need water for photosynthesis. A plant whose leaves are withering due
to lack of water may photosynthesis at a lower rate. However, water is needed
for many other purposes besides photosynthesis and the effect of water shortage
on photosynthesis may be indirect.

To maximise the rate of photosynthesis optimum temperature conditions with
adequate rainfall and sufficient carbon (IV) oxide are necessary.

Study Question 6
Name the factors that affect photosynthesis in plants.

Practical Activity 4

To investigate the factors which are necessary for photosynthe-
sis.
(a) Light

Requirements


--- Page 43 ---

Methylated spirit, iodine solution, water, white tile, droppers, beaker, source
of heat, boiling tube, light proof material (e.g., aluminium foil), potted plant
and clips.

Procedure

1. Cover two or more leaves of a potted plant with a light-proof material as
shown in figure 5.7.

2. Place the plant in a dark place for 48 hours.

. Transfer the potted plant to light for 2-3 hours.

4, Detach and uncover the leaves and immediately carry out the test for
starch as in practical ativity 2. Observe and record the observations.

ss)

\, Leaf covered with
SIX light-proof material

of the leaf

ate — Paper clip
a. 4 Exposed part
i

U ’
—¥— Small young plant

Pot or tin

Fig. 5.7: Necessity for light in photosynthesis
Study Question 7

(a) Why was the plant kept in the dark for 48 hours?
(b) Why was it necessary to transfer the plant to light?
(c) What was the role of the light proof paper?

The plant is kept in the dark for about 48 hours to ensure that all the starch in
it is used up. This is also called destarching. Once destarched, the experimental
plant would be ideal for investigating whether starch would be formed in the
presence of light.

(b) Carbon (IV) oxide

In this experiment, sodium hydroxide pellets are used to absorb carbon (IV)
oxide. Sodium hydroxide is deliquescent and absorbs water to form a solution.
‘The solution formed absorbs carbon (IV) oxide readily.

The leaves outside the flask act as a control. They have access to all
requirements of photosynthesis. The leaf under test lacks carbon (IV) oxide.

Requirements

Conical flasks/polythene bags, potted plants, sodium hydroxide pellets, cork
or plasticine or clay, cork borers, blades, petroleum jelly, iodine solution,
methylated spirit, water, beakers, droppers, white tiles, boiling tubes, source of
heat and wooden support.

Procedure

1. Keep the potted plant in a dark place for 48 hours.

2. Place a few pellets of sodium hydroxide in the flask.

3. Bore a hole in the cork of the same size as the petiole of the leaf being
used.

4. Cut the cork lengthwise.

Cork

we Leaf A still attached to plant
Sodium hydroxide pellets
EZ Support

Fig. 5.8: Necessity for carbon (IV) oxide

5. Remove the plant from the dark and immediately fit the petiole of a leaf A
in the groove and cork the flask as shown in figure 5.8.

. Seal the mouth of the conical flask with petroleum jelly to make it airtight.

. Keep the set up in the light for two to three hours.

. Detach and test for the presence of starch in both leaves A and B.

. Record your observations.

Study Question 8

(a) What is the function of the sodium hydroxide pellets?
(b) Why was the leaf outside the flask also tested for starch?

(c) Chlorophyll

A variegated leaf is one that has some patches that lack chlorophyll. These
patches have other colours for example, yellow. These parts lack chlorophyll
and therefore photosynthetic activity does not take place in them.

oon a

Requirements


--- Page 44 ---

Variegated leaves, iodine solution, methylated spirit, white tile, water, boiling
tubes, beakers, droppers and source of heat.

Procedure

1. Detach or remove variegated leaf from a plant that has been exposed to
light for at least 3 hours.

2. Draw a large labelled diagram of the leaf to show the distribution of the
chlorophyll pigment in the leaf. See figure 5.9.

3. Test the leaf for starch in the usual way as described in activity 2.

4. Record your observations in form of a diagram.

Fig. 5.9: The variegated leaf

Study Question 9

Comment on the distribution of starch in the leaf.
Study Question 10

Compare the distribution of stomata on the upper and lower surfaces of the
leaf.

Practical Activity 5
To investigate the gas produced during photosynthesis

As you are already aware, oxygen gas is a by-product of photosynthesis. This
activity makes use of plants that are submerged in water to find out the gas
released during photosynthesis. Other plants that are not adapted to this
environment may not work well since the set-up provides an aquatic environ-
ment.

As you may notice, the amount of carbon (IV) oxide dissolved in water
may be low. Addition of sodium hydrogen carbonate boosts this amount and
accelerates the rate of photosynthesis.

Requirements

Water plant, e.g., Elodea spp., Spirogyra or Nymphea (water lily), glass funnels,
beakers, small wooden blocks, test tubes, wooden splints and sodium hydrogen
carbonate.

Procedure

1. Setup the experiment as shown in figure 5.10.

2. Place the set-up in the sunlight to allow photosynthesis to take place.

3. Leave the set-up in the sun until sufficient gas has collected in the test-
tube.

4. Test the gas collected with a glowing splint.

5. Record your observations.

> 4—— Test-tube
Bubble of gas

Water to which sodium
_— hydrogen carbonate has

Glass funnel
—— Water plant

Wooden stand

Fig. 5.10: Gas released in photosynthesis

This experiment can be used to investigate various factors on the rate of
photosynthesis such as:

e Temperature

+ Light intensity

* Carbon (VI) oxide concentration

With advice from your teacher, attempt these experiments.
Study Questions 11

(a) What gas is produced during photosynthesis?
(b) Why was sodium hydrogen carbonate used during the experiment?


--- Page 45 ---

(c) Explain why only submerged water plants are used instead of terrestrial
plants in the experiment.

5.3 Chemical Compounds Which Constitute Living
Organisms

Cells, tissues and organs are composed of chemicals which are referred to as
chemicals of life and are obtained from the environment. The study of chemical
compounds found in living organisms and reactions in which they take part is
known as biochemistry. This study attempts to review the chemical composi-
tion of living systems. Many of these chemicals are identical to those found in
nonliving organic matter. However, we shall consider carbohydrates, lipids and
proteins.

5.3 (a) Carbohydrates

Carbohydrates are compounds of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. The elements
are in the ratio of 1 carbon: 2 hydrogen: 1 oxygen. ‘This gives the carbohydrates

‘<b

a general formula (CH,O),, where “n” represents the number of carbon atoms

a molecule of a carbohydrate has. Carbohydrates can be divided into the
following types: monosaccharides, disaccharides and polysaccharides.

(i) Monosaccharides

These are the simplest carbohydrates and have a general chemical formula of
(CH,O),, where n= 6. Hence their chemical formula is C-H,O¢. For example,

glucose, fructose and galactose are simple carbohydrates which have the for-
mula C,H),0,.

Properties of Monosaccharides

Monosaccharides are soluble in water and form sweet tasting solutions. Sweet
tasting fruits owe this property to the abundant content of monosaccharides
in them. When monosaccharides are mixed with Benedict’s solution and
heated, the copper sulphate is reduced to red copper (I) oxide. Thus, they are
described as reducing sugars. They are crystallisable. Molecules of monosac-
charides link together to form complex carbohydrate molecules. This process
is called condensation. In this reaction, water molecules are also formed. For
example, two glucose molecules can be condensed and linked together to form
one molecule of disaccharide.

Functions

(a) Monosaccharides are oxidised during respiration to release energy.
Glucose is the common respiratory substrate and the most common
monosaccharide.

(b) When condensed together, they form polysaccharides such as starch and
cellulose in plants. Glucose can be converted into glycogen which is
stored in animal tissues.

(ii) Disaccharides

They are formed by linking two monosaccharide molecules through the process
of condensation. Therefore, they are more complex than monosaccharides.
Their formation from two monosaccharides results to loss of water molecules.

For example:
Condensation

Monosaccharide + Monosaccharide_. Disaccharide + Water

Condensation

CH,,0, + C,H,,0,

‘6 12

C,H,,0,,+H,0

—

Condensation

Glucose + Glucose Maltose + Water

Condensation

Glucose + Frictoseé __. Sucrose + Water
Condensation

Glucose +Galactose __. Lactose + Water

From the above equations, it can be concluded that the type of disaccharide
formed depends on the monosaccharide units that enter into its composition.

Properties of Disaccharides

Like the monosaccharides, disaccharides are soluble in water to produce sweet
tasting solutions. The sugar cane juice is rich in sucrose. This juice is processed
to make ordinary sugar. Some disaccharides such as sucrose cannot reduce
copper sulphate in the Benedict's solution unless they are first broken down to
their constituent monosaccharides. They are therefore known as non-reducing


--- Page 46 ---

sugars. However, some dissaccharides such as maltose reduce copper sulphate
in Benedict’s solution when heated together. They are known as complex
reducing sugars. Disaccharides can readily be broken into their constituent
monosaccharide molecules in a process known as hydrolysis. ‘The process
involves splitting of complex molecules in the presence of water. For example:
Ayadrolysis
Disaccharide + water _.. 2 Monosacharides
C,, H,, o, = HO a CH,,0, Ey C,

Hydrolysis

Sucrose + water Glucose + Fructose

—

Hydrolysis

Lactose + water _. Glucose + Galactose

Hydrolysis

Maltose + water __. Glucose + Glucose

In nature, disaccharides are hydrolysed by enzymes. In the laboratory, hydro-
lysis can be carried out by heating them with an acid such as dilute hydrochloric
acid.

Functions

Disaccharides are hydrolysed by enzymes into monosaccharides which are
then oxidised to release energy.

(iii) Polysaccharides

Polysaccharides are made up of many monosaccharide molecules. Thus, their
molecules are long and more complex. They have a general formula (CgH)05)

n where the value of n is very large. The polysaccharides commonly found are
starch and cellulose in plants while glycogen is found in animal tissues.

Starch

Starch is present as stored food in plant tissues. It is formed by condensation
of a large number of monosaccharides. Plants that are rich in starch include
maize, wheat, potato and rice. These plants are grown as sources of food.

Cellulose

It exists as a component of the cell wall in plants. It is made up of more
molecules of monosaccharides than starch. Cellulose gives the plant cells their
definite shape.

Glycogen

It is present as stored carbohydrates in animal tissues. Glycogen is synthesised
from excess glucose.

Properties of Polysaccharides

All polysaccharides are insoluble in water and do not have a sweet taste.
‘Therefore, they are referred to as non-sugars.

Study Question 12

(a) Name the carbohydrate that is:
(i) stored in plant seeds.
(ii) stored in mammalian muscles.
(iii) most abundant in human blood.
(b) Summarise the main functions of carbohydrates in living organisms.

Practical Activity 6

To carry out food tests for carbohydrates

(a) Test for starch

Requirements

Starch powder, test-tubes, 10 cm measuring cylinder, dropper, iodine solution,
distilled water, spatula and means of heating.

Procedure

1. Put a spatula endful of starch in a test-tube, add some warm water and
shake.

2. Add three to four drops of iodine solution using a dropper and shake.

3. Observe the colour change and record your observations.

Note: A colour change to blue-black indicates presence of starch.
(b) Test for a reducing sugar

Requirements


--- Page 47 ---

Glucose solution, Benedict's solution, test-tube, beaker, hot water bath, test-

tube holders and 10 cm? measuring cylinder.

Procedure

. Put2cm? of glucose solution in a test-tube.

. Add an equal amount of Benedict's solution into the test-tube.
. Note the colour of the mixture.

. Place the test-tube in a hot water bath.

. Observe and note the colour changes.

oe Se

Note: If colour changes to;

(i) Green - very little reducing sugar is present in the solution.
(ii) Yellow — average amount of reducing sugar is present.
(iii) Red, orange, brown — a lot of reducing sugar is present.

(c) Test for a non-reducing sugar

Non-reducing sugars do not react directly with Benedict's reagent. They are
first hydrolysed into monosaccharides.

Requirements
Sucrose, test-tubes, Benedict's solution, dilute hydrochloric acid, sodium hy-

drogen carbonate solution, hot water bath, dropper and 10 cm? measuring
cylinder.

Procedure

. Put 2 cm? of sucrose solution in a test-tube.

. Add a few drops of dilute hydrochloric acid.

. Place the test-tube into a hot water bath for three minutes.

. Remove the test-tube and cool it in cold water.

Add sodium hydrogen carbonate solution drop by drop until fizzing stops.
. Add 2 cm? of Benedict’s solution to the mixture.

. Place the test-tube in the hot water bath.
. Observe and record the final colour of the solution.

SIND APWN

Note: Dilute hydrochloric acid hydrolyses or breaks down non-reducing sugars
to reducing sugars. Sodium hydrogen carbonate is used to neutralise
the acid. The final colour can be yellow, orange or red which indicates
presence of reducing sugars after hydrolysis.

5.3 (b) Lipids

‘These are fats and oils. Fats are found in animals while oils are found in plant
leaves, fruits and seeds. However, a few animals such as whales contain oil.
Fats and oils are similar except that oils are liquid while fats are solid at room
temperature. Like carbohydrates, they are compounds of carbon, hydrogen
and oxygen. However, the number of oxygen atoms are fewer in lipids than in
carbohydrates. The building units of lipids are fatty acids and glycerol. Synthesis
of lipid molecules requires three fatty acid molecules condensing with one
molecule of glycerol. See figure 5.11.

Fatty acids are of different types. Therefore, the nature of a lipid depends on
the fatty acids it contains even though the glycerol is the same in all lipids. Like
carbohydrates, complex lipids are also formed by a condensation process.
Examples of complex lipids include phospholipids, waxes, steroids and choles-
terol.

Properties of Lipids

When fats are heated, they readily change into liquid, while oils solidify if
subjected to low temperatures. Both fats and oils are insoluble in water. How-
ever, they will readily dissolve in organic solvents such as alcohol, ether and
chloroform. When fat and oils dissolve in these organic solvents, they form
emulsions and suspensions. Lipids are quite inert, a property which enables
them to be stored in the tissues of organisms.

The presence of fats or oils in a substance can be easily detected by using
Sudan III dye, grease spot test and emulsion test.

Functions of Lipids

(i) Lipids as Source of Energy

Lipids are sources of energy just like monosaccharides. A given weight of a
lipid will liberate almost twice as much energy as an equivalent weight of a
monosaccharide.


--- Page 48 ---

Pt —

3 Fatty acid molecules

n_

L_J (Fat)

Fig. 5.11: Diagrammatic representation of fat formation
(ii) Asa Source of Metabolic Water

When oxidised lipids, release more water and energy than monosaccharides.
Such water is known as metabolic water, which supplements the requirements
in the body. This explains why some animals such as camels accumulate large
quantities of fat reserves in their body. They metabolise these fats to obtain the
metabolic water in addition to the energy released.

(iii) As Structural Compounds

Lipids are constituents of plasma membrane and protoplasm. Oils are storage
materials in some seeds e.g. groundnuts, castor seed, maize grain.

(iv) Heat Insulation

In animals, fat is deposited under the skin where it forms the adipose tissue
which acts as a heat insulator. In this way, fats assist to reduce heat loss from
the bodies of mammals. Mammals living in temperate regions have thick
adipose tissue which greatly reduces heat loss. In addition, the thick adipose
tissue in some acquatic mammals helps them to be buoyant in water.

(v) Protection

Fat is deposited around the major organs such as the kidney, heart and at the
back of the eyeball where it acts as a shock absorber. On the other hand, the
wax in plant cuticles reduces excessive water loss.

Study question 13

(a) If glycerol is the same in all lipids, why is corn oil different from coconut
oil?

(b) Outline three properties of lipids.

Practical Activity 7
Testing for the presence of lipids

(a) The grease spot test
Requirements

Fat or oil, filter paper (or white paper) and Bunsen burner.
Procedure

. Rub alittle fat or oil on a filter paper.

. Remove any excess fat from the paper.

. Hold the paper above the flame taking care not to burn it.

. Hold the paper against light. Observe and record what happens to the spot
on which the fat was rubbed.

5. Repeat this procedure with a drop of water and note the difference

between the fat and the water spot.

BwWhe

Note: If permanent translucent spot is formed it indicates the presence of
lipids.

(b) Emulsion test

Requirements

Fat or oil, ethanol (alcohol), test-tubes, 10 cm? measuring cylinder.
Procedure

1. Puta little oil or melted fat in a test-tube.

2. Add 4 cm}? ofalcohol into the melted fat or oil and shake thoroughly.
3. Transfer the contents of the test-tube into another test-tube about half-full
of water.

Note: Formation of white emulsion confirms presence of fats or oils.

5.3 (c) Proteins

Proteins, like carbohydrates and lipids, are compounds of carbon, hydrogen
and oxygen. However, unlike carbohydrates and lipids, they contain nitrogen
and sometimes phosphorus or sulphur or both. Some proteins such as haemo-
globin also contain other elements such as iron. Haemoglobin is a protein
containing iron. Proteins are made up of small units called amino acids. ‘There
are about 20 different types of amino acids occurring naturally. All amino acids


--- Page 49 ---

contain amino group (-NH,) which consists of hydrogen and nitrogen but the

number of carbon atoms differ from one amino acid to the other. Proteins are
referred to as nitrogenous compounds because of the presence of nitrogen in
their structure.

A single molecule of protein can have hundreds or even thousands of
amino acid units which are joined together. Like carbohydrates, proteins are
also formed by condensation. The process involves combination of two amino
acids to form a dipeptide molecule. The bond between the two amino acids is
called a peptide bond. During this process, a water molecule is formed.
Continued condensation leads to the addition of more amino acids to a protein
chain. A long protein chain known as polypeptide results. Figure 5.12 is a
diagrammatic representation of a polypeptide formation.

The uniqueness of a particular protein is determined by the type and
sequence of amino acids that it contains. Theoretically, the possible number
of ways in which amino acids could combine may lead to an infinite number
of proteins. However, this is not the case since organisms possess mechanisms
which control the synthesis of specific proteins. Hence, the number of proteins
in life is much lower than is expected.

2 Amio acid units

Dipeptide

y Ps “\ CONDENSATION

—

.. Amino acid

A polypeptide Chain

——_|

Fig. 5.12: Diagramatic representation of protein synthesis
Properties of Proteins

Most proteins dissolve in water but do not form true solutions. They form
colloidal suspensions where particles remain suspended in water. Collectively,

the colloidal particles have a very large surface area and since they have a
strong capacity to absorb water and other substances, they are important in
holding molecules in position within the cell.

Most proteins are denatured at temperatures above 40°C. The heat alters
the structure of the protein molecule. This changes chemical and physical
properties of proteins and hence, their physiological activity. Denaturing can
also be caused by chemicals such as acids, bases, detergents and organic
solvents. Denaturing is irreversible hence it permanently damages the protein
in the tissues.

Proteins have both acidic and basic properties. Due to these properties,
proteins are described as amphoteric. They therefore, react with acids and
bases. This property enables the proteins to combine with non-protein com-
pounds to form conjugated proteins. For example, in mucus, the non-protein
compound is a carbohydrate while in haemoglobin; the non-protein com-
pound is iron.

Functions of Proteins

(i) Structural Functions

Plants synthesise amino acids which build up the proteins. Animals obtain
proteins from the plants and then break them up during digestion and use the
amino acids to form animal proteins. In both plants and animals, proteins are
used to make the framework of living systems. For example the plasma mem-
branes, connective tissues, muscle fibres, hair, hooves, nails and skeletal ma-
terials.

(ii) As Metabolic Regulators

Enzymes and some hormones are protein in nature. Enzymes are organic
catalysts which speed up metabolic reactions. Thus, they control the rate at
which metabolism takes place. Hormones are chemical messengers which act
as regulators of many body processes for example growth, reproduction and
regulation of chemical substances such as salt, water and sugar.

(iii) As Sources of Energy

Like carbohydrates and lipids, proteins can be broken down to release energy.
However, amino acids cannot be stored in the body like carbohydrates and
fats. Proteins are normally used as a source of energy in conditions of starvation.

Study Question 14

(a) Name the building blocks of proteins.
(b) Differentiate between a dipeptide and a polypeptide.


--- Page 50 ---

(c) List three properties of proteins.
Practical Activity 8
To test for proteins

Requirements

10% sodium hydroxide solution, egg albumen in solution or milk, 1% copper
sulphate, test-tubes, droppers and measuring cylinder.

Procedure

1. Put 2 cm? albumen solution (or milk) in a test tube.

2. Into the test-tube, add an equal amount of the 10% sodium hydroxide
solution and shake.

3. Into the mixture in (2) above, add a few drops of 1% copper sulphate
solution drop by drop, shaking well after each addition.

4. Observe and record the colour change.

Note: Purple colour indicates the presence of protein.

5.3 (d) Enzymes

These are organic catalysts which are protein in nature. They are produced in
living cells. As catalysts, they speed up or slow down the rate of chemical
reactions in the body without themselves being used up. There are two types
of enzymes: intracellular and extracellular enzymes. Intracellular enzymes
are secreted and used within the cells which produce them for example respi-
ratory enzymes. Extracellular enzymes are produced within the cells but used
outside the cells which produced them for example digestive enzymes.

Naming of Enzymes

(i) Trivial naming: The method involves names given to the enzymes by the
people who discovered them. The names end in-in, for example:
pepsin, trypsin, and ptyalin. Some of these names have been retained to
date.
(ii) Use of Suffix-ase
This is the modern method of naming enzymes. The suffix —ase is added
to the substrate (type of food) or the reaction which the enzyme catalyses.
The following are examples of enzymes that act on certain substrates:

Substrate Enzyme
Carbohydrate -  carbohydrase
Starch e.g. amylose - amylase
Sucrose —  sucrase
Maltose -  maltase
Protein — protease
Lipids - lipase

Similarly, the following are some of the examples of enzymes which catalyse
certain reactions.

Reaction Enzyme
Hydrolysis hydrolase
Oxidation oxidase
Reduction reductase

Properties of Enzymes

1. Enzymes are protein in nature. They are therefore affected by temperature
and pH.

2. Enzymes are substrate-specific.

3. They are efficient in small amounts since they are not affected by the
reactions they catalyse. They can be used again and again.

4. ‘They are catalysts that speed up the rate of cellular reactions. They are not
used up in the reactions they catalyse.

5. Many of these enzyme catalysed reactions are reversible.

Factors Which Affect Enzyme Controlled Reactions
The following factors affect enzyme controlled reactions:
Temperature

Enzymes are protein in nature hence they are sensitive to changes in temper-
ature. They work best only within a narrow range of temperature. As the
temperature increases, the optimum temperature is attained where the rate of
enzyme reaction reaches its maximum.


--- Page 51 ---

Optimum temperature

Rate of reaction (arbitrary units)

30 x E
Temperature °C

Fig. 5.13: Effect of temperature on the rate of enzyme activity

Above the optimum temperature, reaction decreases sharply due to
destruction of enzyme structure. That is, the enzyme is denatured. This makes
the enzyme ineffective. Most enzymes have optimum temperature between
35-40°C. Figure 5.13 shows the effect of temperature on the rate of an enzyme
reaction. When the temperature decreases, rate of enzyme reaction decreases
due to inactivation of the enzyme. However, low temperature does not destroy
the enzyme because when temperature is increased, the enzyme becomes active
again.

i
4

Pepsin
Most enzymes

\
\

fo meeeeseeeen---

7 \ _ Optimum
_* pH value

\

2
=
a]
=
s
x4
5
od
LS
=
s
bai
oO
g
3
2
oO
rc

Se ett

Fig. 5.14: Effect of pH on the rate of an enzyme controlled reaction
pH

pH refers to acidity or alkalinity of a substance. Most enzymes have optimum
pH close to 7 which is the intra-cellular pH. However, some enzymes work
best in acidic conditions while others work best in alkaline conditions. As pH
changes from optimum, the enzyme activity decreases. Extreme acidity or
alkalinity denatures most enzymes. See figure 5.14.

Specificity

Enzymes are specific in nature. A particular enzyme will only act ona particular
substrate. For example, salivary amylase will only speed up the break down of
starch to maltose. In other words, two different enzymes cannot act on the
same substrate to bring about similar products.

Substrate Concentration and Enzyme Concentration

When the substrate concentration is increased, the rate of enzyme reaction
also increases up to a certain level. However, further increase in substrate
concentration does not increase the rate of enzyme reaction. This can be
explained in terms of active sites of enzyme. When the substrate concentration
is increased, all active sites of an enzyme are occupied. This condition makes
the number of enzyme molecules to be the limiting factor. When the enzyme
molecules are increased, there is a proportional increase in maximum rate of
enzyme action as shown in figure 5.15.

However, the nzymes are required in small amounts. They speed up the rate of
enzyme reaction but do not alter the equilibrium.


--- Page 52 ---

At higher enzyme
concentration ______ 5

—_—— A

—
~~ At lower enzyme
concentration

Reaction rate

2 _
Substrate concentration

Fig. 5.15:

Graph A - shows the effect of increasing substrate concentration on the rate of
an enzyme-controlled reaction.

Graph B-shows effect of increased enzyme concentration on the rate of an
enzyme-controlled reaction.

Enzyme Co-Factors and Co-enzymes

Co-factors are non-proteinous substances which activate the enzymes. Most
of the enzymes will not work without them. Some of the co-factors are metallic
ions such as those of iron, magnesium, zinc, copper while others are vitamins.
Co-factors are required in small quantities. Like enzymes, co-factors are sub-
stances that can be used again and again. Co-enzymes are other substances
that affect enzyme controlled reactions. These are organic non-protein mole-
cules that work in association with particular enzymes. Many Co-enzymes are
derived from vitamins.

Enzyme Inhibitors

Inhibition occurs when action of an enzyme is slowed down by another
substance. ‘The inhibitor competes with the normal substrate for the active
sites. In other cases the inhibitor takes up the active site of the enzyme perma-
nently.

(i) Competitive Inhibitors

These are chemicals closely related to normal substrate and their shapes are
very similar. When both substrate and inhibitor molecules are present, they

compete for active sites so that the action of the enzyme is slowed down. The
inhibitor is not normally affected by the enzyme so it stays in the active site
longer than the substrate. This type of inhibition has no permanent effect on
the enzyme action. The inhibition they cause can be overcome either by
increasing the substrate concentration or reducing the concentration of the
inhibitor.

(ii) Non-competitive Inhibitors

They are called non-competitive because they do not compete with the sub-
strate. hey combine permanently with enzyme molecules thus blocking the
active site. This prevents the enzyme from interacting with the substrate. Such
inhibitors include poisons such as cyanides, mercury and silver-arsenic com-
pounds. The list is long.

Study Question 15

Rate of enzyme activity

Temperature

Fig. 5.16
Importance of Enzymes

Enzymes speed up cellular reactions so that they proceed at a pace that is
appropriate for sustaining life. Enzymes not only speed up cellular reactions
but also control them. This prevents violent incidents in the cell.

Figure 5.16 shows the rate of enzyme action in relation to changes in temper-
ature.

Use it to answer the following questions:

(a) Explain, giving reasons, the rate of enzyme action:
(i) between Q and R.
(ii) atS.
(iii) between T and U.


--- Page 53 ---

(b) Other than the property investigated above, state three properties of
enzymes.
(c) State the collective name of the enzymes which work on:
(i) Carbohydrates
(ii) Proteins
(iii) Lipids.

Practical Activity 9
To Investigate the factors affecting enzyme activities

(a) Effect of temperature on enzyme activities

Requirements

Six clean test-tubes, white tile, test-tube holder, a dropper, distilled water,
Benedict's solution, iodine solution, water bath maintained at 37°C and 50°C
source of heat, thermometer, measuring cylinders, labels, 6 cm? of amylase
solution and soluble starch powder.

Procedure

1. Label three test-tubes A, B and C.

2. Into test-tube A and B, add 3 cm? of starch solution.

3. Into test-tube A, B and C add 2 cm? of amylase solution.
4+

D

. Place test-tube B in the water bath maintained at 50° C for 30 minutes.
. Place the remaining test tubes A and C in the water bath maintained at
30°C for 30 minutes.
6. After the 30 mins, test for starch and reducing sugars on the contents of
each test tube. Record your results.
7. After the 30 minutes, test for starch and reducing sugars on the contents
of each test-tube. Record your results.

Study Question 16

Which of the test tubes showed:
(i) presence of starch?
(ii) presence of reducing sugars? Explain your results.

(iii) What was the reason for maintaining the test tubes at 37°C?
(iv) treating test-tube C to a temperature of 50°C?

(b) Effect of pH on enzyme activity:

Requirements

Water bath kept at aPC: egg albumen suspension, 2M of hydrochloric acid,

2M sodium hydroxide three test-tubes, 5 cm? of 1% pepsin solution, means of
heating and measuring cylinder.

Procedure

1. Stir the white of an egg (the albumen) with 500 cm? tap water. The
mixture is boiled and filtered through glass wool to remove large particles.

2. Using a measuring cylinder, place 2 cm? of the cloudy suspension of egg
albumen into each of the two test-tubes labelled A, B and C.

3. Add 1 cm? of the 1% pepsin solution to each of the three test tubes A, B,
C.

4. To the contents of test-tube A, add three drops of the 2M hydrochloric
acid, to B add three drops of distilled water and to C add three drops of
the 2M sodium hydroxide solution.

5. Incubate the test tubes for 10 minutes in a water bath kept at B76.

6. Examine the test-tubes every two minutes, noting the cloudiness of the
contents. After the 10 minutes remove the test tubes and place them in a
test-tube rack.

7. Tabulate your results in the following format.

Observation of cloudiness

ae este Om ms [mans 6 ms m0 ma

Study Question 17

(a) Name the tube whose content has different appearance after ten minutes.
Explain the change.

(b) Which aspect of the enzyme properties does the experiment investigate?
Practical Activity 10

To investigate the presence of catalase in living tissues

Catalase is an enzyme present in living tissues of plants and animals. Its role

in living tissues is to break down hydrogen peroxide (H,0,) produced during

cellular metabolism. Hydrogen peroxide is a highly toxic chemical substance
which should not be allowed to accumulate in the tissues. If it were to accu-


--- Page 54 ---

mulate in the tissues, it would interfere with cellular metabolism. Enzyme
catalase breaks it down into water and oxygen which are non-toxic substances.

Requirements

Fresh liver, fresh kidney, fresh muscle, potato, hair, seeds, leaves, hydrogen
peroxide, four test-tubes, wooden splints, means of heating, scalpel blade,

measuring cylinder (10 cm”) and labels.
Procedure

1. Label four test-tubes A, B, C, D and E.

2. Measure 2 cm? of hydrogen peroxide and put in test-tube A. Repeat the
same procedure for test-tubes B, C, D and E

3. Cut a small piece of the liver and place it in test-tube A. Record your
observations.

4. Immediately, introduce a glowing splint into the mouth of the test tube.
Record your observations.

5. Repeat step 3 using muscle tissue, kidney, potato and finally a small
amount of hair.

6. Record your observations noting any differences. Explain your
observations.

7. Repeat step 3 using boiled liver. Make sure that the liver is thoroughly
boiled for about 5 minutes. Record your observations and account for the
differences with unboiled liver.

5.4 Nutrition in Animals Heterotrophism

Heterotrophism is a mode of nutrition that involves taking in complex food
materials such as carbohydrates, proteins and fats obtained from bodies of
other plants and animals. The organisms that feed on these already synthesised
foods are called heterotrophs. The heterotrophs break down or digest these
foods into simple soluble molecules which can pass through the cell membrane
during absorption. Heterotrophs obtain their foods using the following het-
erotrophic modes of nutrition.

(i) Holozoic - This is a type of nutrition characteristic of animals where solid
complex substances are ingested, digested and assimilated in the body.

(ii) Saprophytism - ‘This is a type of nutrition where organisms obtain
nutrients from dead organic matter causing decomposition.

(iii) Parasitism - This is an association where one organism, the parasite,
feeds on or obtains nutrients from the tissues of another living organism, the
host.

(iv) Symbiosis — It is an association where two organisms live together and
mutually benefit from each other.

Heterotrophs are dependent on autotrophic organisms asa source of preformed
organic materials. The following sub-topic considers specifically the main
aspect of nutrition in humans and other animals. Many big-sized animals take
in large particles of food of different types and are, therefore, grouped into
three categories namely: herbivores, carnivores and omnivores. These animals
have four different types of teeth i.e. incisors, canines, pre-molars and molars
and are thus referred to as heterodonts. Other vertebrates have teeth of the
same sizes and shapes and are therefore called homodonts. ‘The description of
types of teeth, their arrangement and specialisation is known as dentition.

Teeth are arranged in groups to occupy specific positions in the jaws. Incisors
are flat, chisel-shaped with sharp ridged edges for cutting and biting food.
‘They have one root. Canines are conical with sharp pointed tips especially
modified in carnivores for seizing prey and tearing flesh. They normally have
one root. Premolars have two roots while molars have two or three roots. Both
have broad surfaces and may be ridged with cusps on their crown for crushing
and grinding of food. Figure 5.17 shows the four types of teeth in a human
being.

Incisor Canine Premolar

Molar

Fig. 5.17: Human teeth
Study Question 18

1. Define the following terms:
(i) symbiosis
(ii) saprophytism


--- Page 55 ---

(iii) parasitism.
2. How are the four types of heterodont teeth adapted to their functions?

Dental Formula

This describes the number, type and position of teeth in the jaws of mammals.
‘The numbers of teeth recorded represent half the total teeth in the upper and
lower jaws. The names of types of teeth are abbreviated as follows: incisors as
i, canine as c, premolar as pm and molar as m.

‘The dentition determines the mode of feeding that is whether herbivores,
carnivores or omnivores.

Herbivores

‘These are animals which feed exclusively on vegetation. They are grouped as
grazers and browsers. Grazers for example cows, donkeys and zebras feed on

grasses while browsers such as giraffes, goats and antelopes feed on shrubs and
herbs.

Herbivores have several adaptations on their dentition that suit them to the
kind of food they take in. Most herbivores do not have upper incisors but
instead have a horny pad against which grass is pressed and cut by the lower
incisors. The long tongue assists in the cutting and turning of grass and also
moving the food during grinding. These functions are made possible by the
diastema. ‘This is a gap in the lower jaw separating the canines from premolars.
The jaws move side by side to enable premolars and molars to grind the food.

There are four different types of herbivore teeth namely incisors, canines,
premolars and molars. These teeth have open enamel in the crown, a condition
which allows continuous growth to replace worn out surfaces due to grinding.
Figure 5.18 (a) and (b) show the dental formula of two herbivores.

Study Question 19

Identify with reasons the mode of feeding of the animal whose dental formula
is given below.

Incisor

Upper jaw

Fig. 5.18 (a): Dentition of the rabbit

Diastema

Pad of gum | Se

incisor /

- 0 0
r>e¢ 7pm

Fig. 5.18 (b): Dentition of the sheep

Canine Premolar

Cheek bone orbit
i

Diastema

oe signa” iy
Lower jaw
~ 2 i) 3 3 4
i;¢ppm5m;,=28



--- Page 56 ---

Carnivores

These are animals which feed exclusively on flesh. Most carnivores are hunters.
Some are adapted to fast running and have well-developed leg muscles that
facilitate this movement. The cheetah is one such animal that moves very fast.
They also have strong jaws and sharp teeth to grasp their prey. They have four
different types of teeth.

Incisors are chisel-shaped and closely fitting to seize the prey. They are
used for gripping and stripping flesh from the bone. Canines are long conical
and curved to hold, kill and tear the prey. Premolars and molars are small
except for special premolars in the lower and upper jaws which are modified
into carnassial teeth. The carnassial teeth have smooth sides and sharp edges
to slice through flesh and crush bones. Jaws are attached to powerful muscles
that move the jaws up and down by snapping. Figure 5.19 on page 75 shows
the dentition of a dog.

Study Question 20

The dentition of a certain animal had the following characteristics: large curved
and sharply pointed canines, small closely fitting incisors, narrow molars and
premolars with cusps. Suggest the likely mode of feeding in this animal.

Omnivores

These are animals which feed on both vegetation and flesh. Omnivores are
discussed in this topic with special reference to the human being in relation to
dentition, dental formula and structure of teeth.

Mammals produce teeth in two sets, milk teeth and permanent teeth.
Milk teeth are the first set of teeth to be produced and then lost between the
age of 6 - 12 years. In human beings 20 milk teeth are produced. Permanent
teeth replace the milk teeth lost. An adult person has 32 permanent teeth.

Practical Activity 11
To study the dentition of sheep

Requirements
Skulls of sheep

Incisors (i)

Premolars (pm) x

“A
Molars (m)

Dental formular

E 4 2
ite= pm—m— = 42
S. 3

3s 1" 4

Fig. 5.19: Dentition and dental formula of a dog
Procedure

1. Examine the lower and upper jaws.

2. List the types and numbers of teeth in the lower and upper jaws of each
specimen.

3. Construct the dental formula.

. Describe the shape and probable function of each type of teeth.

5. For the different types of teeth identified, extract at least one tooth of each
type. Draw and label.

Structure of a Tooth

=

Externally, a tooth is made up of three regions. These are: the crown that
projects above the gum; the root, the part that is embedded in the jaw and the
neck, the region between the crown and root. The crown is covered with a
hard nonliving layer called enamel that is made of calcium phosphate and
carbonate. The enamel is a protective covering of the tooth that also forms a
surface for biting and grinding of food. Internally, a root is mainly composed
of dentine which is not as hard as enamel. The dentine extends to form the
root and consists of living cells. Within the dentine is the pulp cavity containing
nerves and blood vessels. The blood vessels provide nutrients to the living
tissue in the dentine and remove waste products. Nerves detect heat, cold and
pain. ‘The root is fixed into the jaw bone by cement that is surrounded by
supporting fibres. See figure 5.21 (a) and (b).


--- Page 57 ---

Study Question 21

Examine figures 5.20 (a) and (b).
Work out the dental formular of an adult human being.

Jaw hinge

Molars
Premolars

Fig. 5.20 (b): Arrangement of different types of teeth in human jaw

Enamel

Dentine
~—— Puip cavity

—— Blood capillaries
—— Nerve fibres

Gum
Cemeni

——— Jaw bone

capillaries “fi

Fig. 5.21 (b): Vertical section through a molar tooth
Dental Diseases

Tooth decay is on the increase. Dentists have been trying to discover what
causes this decay. ‘There are several possible causes. One possible cause, sup-
ported by a great deal of evidence, is that the sugars and starch we eat become
logged between the teeth and teeth cavities where they are broken down by
microorganisms. The micro-organisms use up the sugars for their own food
and produce acids as waste products. The acids react with the enamel and
dentine of the teeth, causing them to dissolve. A hollow area of those decayed
parts is formed. When the decaying process continues into the pulp cavity, the
nerves are affected and therefore, a lot of pain is felt (toothache). In very serious
cases, the pulp cavity may be destroyed and the infection spreads to the gums.
‘There are two main dental diseases discussed below.


--- Page 58 ---

Dental carries and Periodontal diseases

(i) Dental carries is caused by lack of hard food, too much sweet or sugary
foods, lack of calcium in the diet, lack of vitamin D, lack of cleaning teeth and
general ill-health. These have the effect of causing gradual tooth decay as
shown in figure 5.22.

(ii) Periodontal disease is caused by lack of vitamins A and C, lack of
massage of the gums and lack of proper cleaning of gums. This disease causes
the gums to become soft and flabby so that they do not support the teeth. It is
more common in adults than in children. ‘There are two types of periodontal
disease pyorrhoea and gingivitis. Gingivitis is characterised by the reddening
of the gums, bleeding and the presence of pus in the gums. Pyorrhoea is a
condition where teeth become loose due to infection of the fibres holding the
teeth in the sockets. The diseases can be avoided by eating a balanced diet,
brushing the gum regularly to encourage blood circulation and removing food
particles through observing dental hygiene.

Decay of enamel starting

Nerve fibres in the pulp at ¥y “av |
Uf We
YJ /
Decay affects the nerve
fibres in the cavity
ae da

Decay of enamel continues
and affects ihe dentine
|

Hole left by the decaying areas

if

Abscess (Swelling) on the roats

Fig. 5.22: Progressive stages in tooth decay
Dental Hygiene

Proper care of the teeth requires the following:

(i) Regular cleaning or brushing of teeth after every meal.

(ii) Avoid eating too much sugary foods.

(iii) Eating hard foods, for example raw carrots, cassava, yams and sugar
cane. This helps to remove the soft materials from the gums and teeth.
It also helps to exercise the teeth.

(iv) Eating diet rich in calcium, phosphate and vitamins A, C and D.

(v) Teeth should be used for their proper purpose. They should not be used
to open beverage bottles or crack hard nuts.
(vi) A regular visit to the dentist is necessary.

Study Question 22

(a) State four ways of keeping teeth healthy.
(b) Draw a neat well-labelled diagram of the internal structure of an incisor
tooth.

Digestive System in Animals

‘The digestive system is made up of the alimentary canal, and it is associated
with organs such as the liver and pancreas. The main functions of the digestive
system are digestion and absorption apart from others like ingestion and
egestion.

The alimentary canal, also known as the digestive tract, is a tube leading
from the mouth to anus. It consists of oesophagus, stomach, small intestines,
(comprising duodenum and ileum) and the large intestines the caecum, ap-
pendix, colon and rectum. See figure 5.23.

— Parotid salivary gland
Tengue ——
Sub-mandibular salivary gland ~~

sublingual salivary gland-~
"9 v9 esophagus {Gullet)

— Cardiac sphincter
Liver iY aS} Stomach

Gall bladder — Pyloric sphincter
Bile duct —

=e Panceas
4 ty —__—-—— Pancreatic duct
‘ - Coton

llaum
Caecum ——

Appendix -—-
Rectum

Anus

Fig. 5.23: The alimentary canal of a man

The alimentary canal is relatively long and greatly folded to increase the surface
area for digestion and absorption of food. It is also wide and narrow in some
parts and in others it is sac-like. Although each different portion of the mam-


--- Page 59 ---

malian digestive tract has its own adaptations in relation to function, all
conform to a basic common structure as shown in figure 5.24.

Also of interest to note is that although the digestive tracts of mammals
show the basic fundamental plan, there exist slight variations which correlate
to the kind of diet each animal eats, that is different eating habits. For example,
carnivores have a relatively short digestive tract with very much reduced and
functionless caecum and appendix. This is because the digestion of proteins
which form the bulk of their diet is rapidly digested in the gut. However, some
herbivores have a very long digestive tract with a single stomach and a large
caecum and appendix particularly in non-ruminant ones such as the rat. But
in ruminant herbivores such as cows, the stomach is four-chambered in order
to increase the surface area for the digestion of cellulose which takes a long
time.

Circular ~~

Fig. 5.24: A transverse section of the gut wall of a mammal

5.5 Food Processing along the Digestive Tract

‘This is the treatment which food undergoes as it passes along the tract so that
food nutrients are availed to the body tissues. Since much of the food an animal
takes in (ingests) is made up of large complex molecules (for example carbo-
hydrates, proteins and fats), it is first broken down to simpler and soluble
molecules before they can be absorbed. The process of food breakdown is
called digestion.

However, small molecules like those of vitamins, mineral salts and water are
directly absorbed into the blood stream without undergoing digestion.

Along the digestive tract, food digestion occurs in the following regions:
mouth, the stomach, the duodenum and the ileum. Each region is adapted to
its functions in a variety of ways.

Digestion in the Mouth

The introduction of food into the mouth is called ingestion. In the mouth,
food is mechanically broken down by the teeth in the process of chewing and
grinding. This is also known as mastication. Mastication reduces food to
small particles and also increases the surface for enzymatic action. During this
process, the food is moistened and mixed with saliva secreted from the salivary
glands. The glands are located in various places around the mouth region.
There are three pairs of salivary glands:

(i) Sublingual salivary glands are beneath the tongue.

(ii) Sub-mandibular salivary glands are under the jaw.

(iii) Parotid salivary glands are found in the cheeks in-front of the ears.

All these glands have ducts that open into the mouth and through which saliva
flows into the mouth. Saliva is a mixture of water, mucus and an enzyme called
salivary amylase or ptyalin. The mixture is slightly alkaline and this provides
a suitable medium for the function of the salivary amylase. Water acts as a
solvent while mucus lubricates the food and the lining of the mouth. The
enzyme digests starch to maltose. The tongue rolls the food into small round
masses called boluses (singular, bolus). The tongue then pushes the bolus into
the pharynx (back of the mouth). This is the beginning of swallowing. ‘The soft
palate is raised to open the gullet and close the nasal cavity while the epiglottis
relaxes to close the wind-pipe or trachea.

‘The food then passes down into the oesophagus or gullet. The gullet wall
contains circular and longitudinal muscles. The passage of the bolus down the
gullet is aided by a wave of muscle contractions known as peristalsis. ‘This
produces a series of constrictions that squeeze the bolus down the gullet and
into the stomach as shown in figure 5.25.

ae

[| Guillet

|

Fi
fy
j

( Ca Contraction of gullet muscles

Jiyhe First position of bolus
— Contraction of muscles

‘4+}~ Second position of balus

Fig. 5.25: Diagrammatic representation of peristalsis


--- Page 60 ---

Digestion in the stomach

The bolus enters the stomach through a muscular valve known as the cardiac
sphincter. ‘The stomach wall is made up of thick circular muscle and longitu-
dinal muscle layers. These muscles contract and relax producing movements
that mix the contents of the stomach. The mixing is known as churning and
results in the formation of a fluid called chyme.

The presence of food in the stomach stimulates the secretion of the hormone
gastrin which in turn stimulates the production of gastric juice from the
gastric glands embedded in the glandular layer of the stomach wall.

Gastric juice contains:

(i) Pepsinogen which is activated to pepsin enzyme in the lumen of the
stomach. Pepsin breaks down proteins into peptides.

(ii) Renin Enzyme which digests the protein caseinogen in milk to casein
(curd). Renin is abundant in suckling young children.

(iii) Hydrochloric acid which provides an acidic medium for the optimum
activities of these enzymes. The acid also kills some bacteria that may
be present in the food.

(iv) Mucus which forms a protective barrier to the stomach wall against
corrosions by the hydrochloric acid.

Digestion in the Duodenum

The chyme is let out into the duodenum through the pyloric sphincter. The

sphincter muscle allows small quantities of chyme to pass through at a time.

The duodenum is the first part of the small intestine where most of the

digestion takes place. The duodenum receives secretions from the following

organs:

(i) ‘The liver has specific cells which secrete bile into the gall bladder to be
stored. The gall bladder releases the bile into the duodenum through
bile duct.

(ii) The pancreas lies just below the stomach. It is a thin flat and cream-
coloured gland. It plays two major roles; secretion of hormones and the
secretion of digestive juices.

‘The arrival of food into the duodenum stimulates secretion of the hormone

secretin from the pancrease and cholecystokinin from the duodenal wall.

Secretin stimulates the secretion of pancreatic juice into the duodenum

whereas cholecystokinin stimulates the secretion of bile from the gall bladder.

‘The pancreatic juice is alkaline and contains three digestive enzymes:

(i) Pancreatic amylase which speeds up the breakdown of the remaining
starch into maltose.

(ii) Trypsin digests proteins into peptides. This enzyme is secreted in its
inactive form trypsinogen.

(iii) Pancreatic lipase digests lipids into fatty acids and glycerol.

(iv) Also produced by the pancreas is the sodium hydrogen carbonate
which neutralises the acidic chyme and creates a suitable alkaline
medium for pancreatic and intestinal enzymes.

The bile contains bile salts that include sodium glycocholate and sodium
taurocholate. These two salts aid in the breakdown of fats into tiny fat droplets
to increase their surface area for digestion. This breakdown is known as
emulsification. The salts also provide an alkaline medium in which the
enzymes listed above work best. They also neutralise the acidic chyme from
the stomach. Figure 5.26 illustrates emulsification.

LF Emulsitication e
é

Ly Small fat droplets
Large fat droplets

Fig. 5.26: Illustration of emulsification
Practical Activity 12

To demonstrate emulsification of fats

Requirements
Sodium hydrogen carbonate solution, cooking oil, water, test-tubes, ruler and
measuring cylinder.

Procedure

1. Pour 2 cm? of cooking oil into the test tubes labelled A and B.

2. Add 2 cm? of sodium hydrogen carbonate solution into test tube A. Rinse
the measuring cylinder.

Add 2 cm? of water into test tube B.

Shake the contents in both test tubes.
Write down your observations.

Te

Digestion in the Ileum

The ileum is the lower part of the small intestine and the longest section of the
alimentary canal. It is largely coiled to fit in the limited abdominal space. The
inner walls of the ileum contain secretory cells, some of which secrete mucus


--- Page 61 ---

and others secrete an alkaline fluid known as intestinal juice or succus

entericus. The arrival of chyme in the ileum stimulates the secretion of intes-

tinal juice. The juice contains four enzymes that carry out digestive functions

as follows:

(i) Maltase - speeds up breakdown of maltose to glucose.

(ii) Sucrase - speeds up breakdown of sucrose into glucose and fructose.
Maltase and sucrase complete the digestion of the carbohydrates.

(iii) Peptidase —- breaks down peptides into amino acids.

(iv) Lipase — breaks down lipids into fatty acids and glycerols.

Table 5.1: Summary of digestion

Part of the | Giand
alimentary
canal

Substrate Products
(food acted
upon)

Starch

Secretion Enzymes

Salivary Ptyalin o1 Maltose

salivary
amylase
Gastric Pepsin
juice Renin

Protein
Milk protein
Starch

Gastric Peptides
Clotted casein

Maitose

Pancreatic
juice Anmrylase

(bile salts only)
Maltase Maltose Glucose

‘The process of digestion is thus completed in the ileum. The resulting watery
emulsion of food is called chyle and contains soluble products of digestion
ready to be absorbed. The entire canal is lined with an epithelial membrane
that contains goblet cells which secrete mucus. The mucus allows smooth
movement of food materials and also coats the wall of the alimentary canal,
thus protecting it from being digested by the enzymes.

Duodenum| Pancreas Pancreatic

Crypts of | Succus

Lipase

By the time food is fully digested, most of the enzymes on table 5.1 will have
acted on the food and broken it to the end-products summarised as shown in
the table 5.1.

Study Question 23

(a) List down the pH under which enzymes in each of the following parts of
the alimentary canal work:
(i) Mouth
(ii) Stomach
(iii) Duodenum
(iv) Tleum.
(b) What are the final products of digestion for:
(i) Carbohydrates?
(ii) Proteins?
(iii) Fats and Lipids?

Epithelial cel
Epithelial cells 3 3
Blood capillary oe
| f

{
Pr Microwilti

\o 2

Gliobet cell

SS

“s : io Crypt of lieberkuhn
ms

Tiga Branch of vein

Brunner's gland

Fig. 5.27: A Villus
Absorption

‘This is the process by which the soluble products of digestion diffuse into the
cellular lining of the villi. Diffusion of these products continues through the
thin walls of the capillary network and into the bloodstream. Absorption of
alcohol, some water, water soluble vitamins B and C and water soluble salts
takes place in the stomach.

Most absorption of final products of digestion occurs in the small intestines.
‘The ileum is where absorption of digested food substances occurs and it is
adapted to its function in the following ways:


--- Page 62 ---

(i) It is long and therefore provide a large surface area for absorption in
addition, it is narrow so as to bring digested food into close contact
with the walls of the ileum for easier absorption.

(ii) ‘The ileum is highly coiled in order to slow down movement of food
and thus allowing more time for digestion and absorption to take
place. It also increases the surface area for digestion and absorption.

(iii) The inner surface of the ileum has large numbers of villi and
microvilli which increases the surface area for absorption of end-
products of digestion. Figure 5.27 shows such a villus.

(iv) The presence of a thin layer of cells through which digested food
diffuses.

(v) The presence of a dense network of blood capillaries in the villi into
which amino acids, sugars, vitamins, mineral salts, some fatty acids and
glycerol are absorbed. ‘This helps to maintain a steep diffusion gradient.

(v) Presence of lacteals in the villi for the absorption of fatty acids and

glycerol.

The molecules of amino acids and glucose pass through the epithelia of the
villi and the capillary walls into the blood system by active transport. The
capillaries drain into the hepatic portal vein where the amino acids and glucose
are carried to the liver before being allowed to join general body circulation.

The fatty acids and glycerol are absorbed into lacteals of the villi which
drain into the lymphatic vessels. The lacteal contents join the general lymphatic
system which ultimately finds its way into the blood circulatory system. The
fatty acids and glycerol are then distributed to all parts of the body.

Egestion

The undigested and indigestible food substances reach the large intestine by
the process of peristalsis. As these materials pass through the colon, water is
extensively absorbed. The remaining semi-solid waste material is then passed
to the rectum where it is eventually eliminated from the body as feaces through
the anus as the anal sphincter muscle relaxes.

The Caecum and Appendix

The caecum and the appendix have no function in humans. However, in
herbivores, they contain a large number of bacteria which secrete enzyme
cellulase that digests cellulose, breaking it down into glucose. The bacteria are
in a symbiotic relationship with the herbivores. Some of the glucose is used by
the bacteria but most of it is assimilated by the herbivores.

Assimilation

The absorbed products of digestion are carried in the blood stream to the rest
of the body. From the blood, the body cells are able to obtain these substances
and use them in their metabolism. The incorporation of these products of
digestion into the cell metabolism is known as assimilation. The different food
types are assimilated or utilised as follows:

(a) Glucose is oxidised to release chemical energy during respiration and
the excess is stored in the body as fats underneath the skin or in the
form of glycogen in liver or muscle cells.

(b) Fatty acids and glycerol are also oxidised to release energy but most of
the fatty acids and glycerol combine into neutral fats which are stored
underneath the skin to insulate the body against cold.

(c) Amino acids are used in the synthesis of proteins for general body
growth and repair of worn out tissues. In absence of fats and glucose,
they may be used to release energy through oxidation.

Study Question 24

Under which conditions will the body use proteins as a source of energy?

Stomach
Spleen
Pancreas —— “ ~

~~ Appendix

—_

leum ~~
~ Caecum

Colon

Fig. 5.28: Display of alimentary canal and associated glands of a rat


--- Page 63 ---

Practical Activity 13

Dissecting a mammal to display the digestive system and asso- —_[*TTAMINA

ciated organs

Requirements

Small freshly killed mammals such as a rat, a guinea pig, a rabbit, a mouse or
a hare, dissecting kit, dissecting basin or board, cotton wool and mounting
pins.

Procedure
. . . . . . amd nicoumic acid.)

1. Dissect the mammal using the procedure in the dissection guide.

2. Display the alimentary canal and the associated glands as shown in figure

5.28.

VITAMIN B_
(Pantothenic acid)

Main food source

Liver, milk_eges. cod
Liver oil, carrots, fresh
green vegetables. e.g.
spinach and siAuana
wiki,Le., kale

Groundnuts beans,
unpolished cereals,
ege-yolk. nulk. lver
and kidney

AsforB,, plus sreen
vegetables and yeast
extract

Sources are those for B.
and B., but especially
in eges

Uses in the baay

For vision especially
in the night. Protects
skin and comea from
drying and becoming

For cell respiration
and for proper growth in
chiidren

For nommal ckin bealth
and function, for cell
respiration.

For respiration, proper
funcooning of the
nervous system and the
alimentary canal.

Deficiency disease symptoms

Poor night vision and
sore eyes, dry, scaly skin
and comea. reduced
resistance fo diseases,
cold and bronchitis.

General weakness.
fetanded growth in children.
The disease. Beri-ber.
characterised by wastmg
of nmuscles and swelling
of feet and legs
Skin disorders, somes and
bleeding in the mouth and
gum. These are symptoms
of the disease pellagra.
Malfunctionins of the

nervous system and
digestive system.

5.6 Importance of vitamins and salts

Vitamins

Vitamins are organic chemical compounds that are essential for a healthy body.
They are obtained from fresh fruits and vegetables. Some are synthesised in
the body by the activity of micro-organisms present in the gut. An example of
this is vitamin K.

Vitamins are destroyed when the food is excessively cooked. Although vitamins
are required in small quantities, they play an important role in metabolic
reactions. Some act as co-enzymes in enzyme activities while others influence
intakes of certain substances into the body. For example, vitamin D influences
absorption of calcium ions in the gut. Such vitamins are not affected by the
reactions they influence hence they can be used repeatedly. Lack of vitamins
in the diet results in a breakdown of normal body activities and produce
deficiency diseases. ‘The breakdown can be corrected by including the necessary
vitamins in the diet. Table 5.2 gives some of those important vitamins, their
major food sources and deficiency symptoms. which allows smooth movement
of food in the alimentary canal. Lack of roughage in the diet leads to constipa-
tion.

Liver, beef and kidney,

Fresh citrus fruits
such as lemons. oranges,

grapes, green vegetables.

Mangoes, pawpaws and
tomatoes

Milk. fish, liver. egg-
yolk, formed in skin
im the presence of
sunlight

Milk, ege-yolk green
vegetables and vegetable
oils

Liver, egg-yolk. green
vegetables, ¢.2. cabbage
and spinach, unpolished
cereals

Practical Activity 14

For fonmation of blood
cells.

For protection against
infection.

For fonmation and
hardening of bones for
strong teeth

For absorption of calcium
and phosphorus.
Necessary for nomnal
fertlity n some annals,
necessary for cell
metabolism

Necessary for blood
clotine.

Test for ascorbic acid (Vitamin C)

Low red blood cell count
due to pernicious anaemia.
Bleeding of mouth and
gum, anaemia, swellines on
the skin. poor healing of
wounds, reduced resistance
to infection. These are
symptoms of the disease scurvy
Abnomual bone fomnation
im children. soft and bnitle
bones in adults. These are
symptoms of the disease
rickets

Sterility in some animals.

Excessive bleeding

Requirements

0.1% solution of ascorbic acid, 0.1% of dichlorophenol indophenol (DCPIP),

test-tube, dropper and 10 cm measuring cylinder.

Table 5.2: Vitamins; sources, uses and deficiency symptoms



--- Page 64 ---

Procedure

1. Place 2 cm? of DCPIP into a test-tube.

2. Add ascorbic acid solution drop by drop into the DCPIP in the test-tube
and shake well after each drop.

3. Observe the colour changes of DCPIP.

Note: Ascorbic acid decolourises DCPIP indicator.
Mineral Salts

Mineral salts are important inorganic compounds containing elements which
are essential for normal body metabolism. Some of these elements are required
in large quantities and are therefore called macro-nutrients while others are
required in small quantities hence are called micro-nutrients or trace elements.
Animals obtain these elements from the foods they take in. Table 5.3 gives a
summary of the elements, their sources and importance in the body.

Table 5.3: A summary of the elements, their sources and importance in the body
Disease caused by
deficiency

Rickets, disease
characterised by
poorly developed
bones

Element

Function in the body

Meat, milk eges. fish
and other protein foods.

For synthesis of protein. For

formation of cells, tissues and
structures such as hair and nails.
Synthesis of proteins, formation
of bones and teeth. Fonnation
of ATP.

Phosphorus | Protein foods

Calenm Green vevetables,

milk and cheese.

sea fish such as cod and
salmon.

Liver, beef, vegetables,
milk and eggs.

| For blood clotting and musele contra-

fodised table salt, cheese,

Muscle cramps

and rickets.

Goitve characten-
sed by a swelling of
the thyroid glands
in the neck reson

ction_ Formation of bones and teeth.
Formation of the hormone
thyroxine.

Transmission of nerve impulses.

Liver, eg25, ereen
vegetables, e 2. spinach
and kale.

Table salt, eteen vege-
tables, fish, milk

Formation of haemoglobin in red
blood cells, role in respiration

Maintain osmotic balance of
body fluids. Transmission
of nerve impulses,

Table: salt

Protein foods

Maintain osmotic balance of
body fluids. Dnportant in wans-
mission of nerve impulses.
Protem synthesis. Formation of
body tissues.

Roughage

It is composed of cellulose and plant fibres. Mammals do not produce any
enzymes that can digest cellulose. Some mammals rely on micro-organisms
which secrete cellulase that digests cellulose. The micro-organisms are present
in their gut. In humans, these organisms are absent hence no digestion of
roughage takes place. Roughage adds to the bulk of food and also promotes
peristalsis,

Water

Water has a wide variety of functions in living cells. It is not therefore regarded
simply as a nutrient. Water makes about 65-70% of the total body weight. The
importance of water is clear from the fact that a human deprived of water will
live for only a few days, whereas it is possible to survive for more than 60 days
without food. The main functions of water are: activity as a solvent, cooling
the organism, providing a media of transport and faciliting hydrolysis.

5.7 Factors determining energy requirements in
human beings

Heat produced by the body comes from oxidation of food. This can be used to
determine the energy content of foods. Heat energy is measured in units called
kilojoules (kj). One gram of carbohydrates yields 17.1 kJ of energy. Fats release
31.8 kJ of energy while proteins release 22 kJ. These figures represent energy
values of these foods.

The amount of energy required depends on the following factors:

(i) Basal Metabolic Rate (B.M.R.)

This is the energy required to maintain normal body functions such as breath-
ing, heartbeat, circulation and other basic body reactions. It is also used to
maintain constant body temperature. This requires about 760 kJ per day for a
man at rest. This does not include any activity the man does for example
walking, eating and bathing.

(ii) Occupation or Everyday Activity

‘This involves activities one does every day. It determines the energy require-
ment of the person. For example, a labourer pulling a cart or digging or mixing
concrete in a construction site requires more energy than an office worker, a
doctor or a teacher. Manual workers should take more energy-giving foods to
sustain their high energy demand. See plate 5.2.

(iii) Age


--- Page 65 ---

Young children have many actively dividing cells and they are physically more
active than adults. Therefore, their basal metabolic rate is higher than that of
adults. As they grow older, they become less active physically and their energy
requirements decrease.

(iv) Body Size

Small-bodied people have a small volume which leads to a large surface area
to volume ratio. Therefore, their bodies lose more heat energy to the surround-
ing. Such people require more energy-giving foods. On the other hand-big-
bodied people have a small surface area to volume ratio. They lose less heat to
the surrounding as compared to thin people.

Plate 5.2: Manual workers require a lot of energy to carry out their daily chores

Therefore, their energy requirement is low. Some big-bodied people may,
however, eat a lot to maintain the high energy demands of their large bodies.

(v) Sex

Many males are more muscular than females. That means their bodies have
more muscles than fat while females have a lot of fat as compared to the males.
Hence males normally use more energy. See table 5.4 for this comparative case
study.

Table 5.4: Energy use per day (KJ)

i
i
i
zs

Study Question 25

From table 5.4, explain why after age 8, males require more energy than
females.

Revision Questions

1. Define the term photosynthesis.

2. State four requirements and their sources for the process of

photosynthesis to occur.

3. Discuss the role of each of the following structures of the leaf during

photosynthesis:
(i) Xylem vessels.
(ii) Chlorophyll.
(iii) Guard cells.

4, (a) Illustrate by means of a simple labelled diagram the structure of a
chloroplast. (b) State the parts where (i) light reaction, (ii) dark
reaction occurs.

5. Explain each of the following:

(a) Variegated plants accumulate less food than non-variegated plants
under similar conditions.
(b) A leaf cannot be tested for starch by adding iodine solution directly.
(c) Most leaves are thin with broad surface.
(d) Plants will not photosynthesise in the dark.
6. (a) Name the elements that form:
(i) Carbohydrates.
(ii) Proteins.
(b) (i) State two properties of polysaccharides.
(ii) Write down three differences between polysaccharides and
monosaccharides.



--- Page 66 ---

(c) What are the building blocks of proteins?
Carbon (IV) oxide concentration | 0 0.02] 0.03} 0.05) O07) 0.10) 0.13) 0.15] O17 0.20
Se by Vol. i air.
Rate of photosynthesis 29 | 38 46 | 46 | 46 | 46
(Arbitrary Units)

7. (a) State two functions of lipids in the human body.
8. A particular food substance is suspected to contain vitamin C.
(i) What chemical would you use to confirm the presence of the
vitamin?
(ii) What are the expected results if vitamin C is present?
9. An experiment was performed to find out how the concentration of an
enzyme affected the rate of reaction of a chemical process. Three test-
tubes were set up as described below:

ra [oser | oder [orem

‘The data obtained from the experiment was used to plot the graph figure 5.29.

Test-tube A
= Test-tube B

aad
Test-tube C

Products (Arbitrary units)

Fig. 5.8

(a) From the graph, explain how enzyme concentration affects the rate of
reaction.
(b) From the graph, what is the rate of reaction in test-tube B?
(c) At what time interval were the readings taken?
(d) Why are some of the points not on a straight line?
(e) Why were different amounts of distilled water added to test-tubes A,
B and C?
10. (a) What do you understand by the term heterotrophism?
(b) State any four heterotrophic modes of nutrition.
11. State the factors that determine energy requirements in human beings?
12. Explain the following terms:

(i) peristalsis
(ii) emulsification
(iii) assimilation.
13. Name two nutrients that do not require digestion before they are
absorbed. Explain why this is so?
14. Figure 5.30 is a portion of human alimentary canal.

a
g
e
£
1
2
4
G
a
=
E
ra

Fig. 5.29

(a) (i) Which part of the alimentary canal is represented by the portion
above?
(ii) Give one reason for your answer in (a) (i) above?
(b) State two functions of the part of alimentary canal represented above.
(c) State four adaptations of the part of alimentary canal represented
above.
15. Explain why enzymes trypsin and pepsin are produced by glands along
the alimentary canal as trypsinogen and pepsinogen respectively.
16. Figure 5.30, represents a longitudinal section of a human tooth.
(i) What type of tooth is represented by figure 5.30. Give reasons.
(ii) State the functions of the tooth.
(iii) Using figure 5.30, name the structures labelled P, Q, R and state
their functions.
(iv) State four ways of keeping teeth healthy.



--- Page 67 ---

Fig. 5.30

17. In which region of the mammalian digestive tract does digestion of fats
begin?

18. List four components of the pancreatic juice.

19. Give a reason why the digestion of starch started in the mouth with the
help of salivary amylase is not continued in the stomach.

20. Explain the most likely effect on digestion if the small intestines of a
human is reduced in an operation.

. In an experiment to find out the action of pepsin on egg albumen, 5 cm?
of egg albumen suspension was placed in each of four test-tubes Q, R, S
and T. Three drops of hydrochloric acid were added to the test-tubes Q, R
and T.

1 cm? of 1% boiled pepsin was added to test-tubes R and T and 1 cm? of

unboiled pepsin to test-tubes Q and S. The four test-tubes were then

placed in a water bath at 37°C for 8 minutes.

(a) ‘Tabulate the results expected from this experiment.

(b) State two conclusions that you would draw from the results of this
experiment.

(c) Why was it necessary to keep the test-tubes at 37°C?

(d) Where is pepsin produced in the body?

2

_


--- Page 68 ---

Index

Absorption 83

Absorption of Materials 34
Active sites of enzyme 68
Active transport 33, 44
Adaptations of the leaf 51
Adenosine Triphosphate 54
Alimentary canal 79

Amino acids 65, 84
Amphoteric nature of proteins 66
Ancestral stock 10

Animalia 14

Antony van Leeuwenhoeck 18
Appendix 79, 84
Assimilation 84
Autotrophism 48

Basal Metabolic Rate 88

Bile 81

Binomial nomenclature 16
Binomial system 16
Biochemistry 59

Biology 1

Botany and zoology 1
Branches of Biology 1
Caecum 79, 84

Canines 72

Carbohydrates 48, 63
Carbon (IV) oxide fixation 54
Cardiac sphincter 80
Carnassial teeth 74

Carriers 44

Catalysts 66

Cell 18

Cell diameter 28

Cell membrane 21, 24, 32, 40
Cell physiology 32

Cell specialisation 29

Cell structure 21

Cell Wall 21, 26

Cellulose 61

Centriole 25, 26

Chemicals of life 59
Chemosynthesis 48
Chlorophyll 25, 50, 53, 58
Chloroplast 21, 25, 32, 51, 52
Classes 14

Classification 10

Collection of Specimens 3
Competitive Inhibitors 69
Compound microscope 18
Concentration gradient. 44
Condensation 60, 65
Conjugated proteins 66
Crenation 40

Cytoplasm 24

Cytoplasmic streaming 24
Dental Diseases 77

Dental Formula 73

Dental Hygiene 78
Dentition 72

Deplasmolysis 41
Diaphragm 20

Diastema 73

Diffusion 33

Diffusion gradient 34, 35
Digestion 79

Digestion in the Duodenum 80
Digestive System in Animals 78
Diversity of Living organisms 10
Ecology 1

Electron micrographs 22
Electron microscope 22
Emulsification 81

Emulsion test 64
Endoplasmic reticulum 24, 25
Entomology 1
Environmental problems 1
Enzyme Co-Factors 69


--- Page 69 ---

Enzyme Inhibitors 69
Enzyme-controlled reaction 56
Enzymes 66, 67
Epidermis 50

Estimation of Cell Size 27
Excretion 3

Fatty acids 84

Flagella 25

Functions of Proteins 66
Fungi 14

Gaseous exchange 235
Genera 15

Genetics 1

Genus 16

Glycerol 63, 84

Goblet cells 82

Golgi bodies 25

Grana 53

Granular endoplasmic reticula 24
Growth and Development 3
Guard cells 43
Haemolysis 40

Heat Insulation 64
Herbivore teeth 73
Heterotrophism 48, 72
Historical Background of Classification 10
Holozoic 72

Hormones 66
Hydrochloric acid 80
Hydrolysis 61

Hypertonic 38
Hypotonic 38

Ingestion 7

Insectivorous plants 43
Irritability 3

Isotonic 38

Kingdom 14

Lacteals 84

Lamellae 52

Lamina 49

Latin language 15

Latinised name 16

Leaf mosaic 52

Light dependent Stage 53
Light Independent Stage 54
Light Intensity 55

Light microscope 18, 22, 50
Lipids 62

Living organisms 8, 10, 48
Lysosomes 25
Macro-nutrients 87
Magnification 20, 21
Magnifying Lens 8
Metabolic reactions 85
Metabolic Regulators 66
Micrometres 28
Micro-nutrients 87
Mineral salts 87
Mitochondria 24, 32
Modern classification 10
Monera 14
Monosaccharides 59, 60, 63
Movement of materials 32
Multicellular 18

Naming of Enzymes 67
Nanometres 28

Need for Classification 10
Non-competitive Inhibitors 69
Non-reducing 60

Nuclear membrane 24, 26
Nucleus 26

Nutrition 2

Oils 63

Orders 14

Organelles 21, 32
Osmometer 40
Osmoregulation 43
Osmosis 33

Osmotic potential 40
Osmotic pressure 40, 43
Palisade layer 51
Parasitism 72


--- Page 70 ---

Permanent wilting 43

pH 33, 44, 68

Phloem 51

Photolysis of water 53
Photosynthesis 32, 35, 48, 52, 54, 56
Phylogeny 10

Phylum 14

Plantae 14

Plants and animals 6

Plasma membrane 24, 41
Plasmolysis 41

Polysaccharides 59, 61
Pre-molars 72

Primary producers 48

Proteins 65, 66

Protoctista 14

Reducing sugars 60
Reproduction 3

Research biologists 8
Resolving power 22
Respiratory gases 35
Ribosomes 25

Role of Diffusion 34

Roughage 87

Saprophytism 72

Scientific names 16

Scientific Naming of Living Organisms 15
Scientific skills 1

Selectively permeable 24
Semi-Permeability 24, 32, 33, 44
Sodium glycocholate 81
Sodium hydrogen carbonate 81
Sodium taurocholate 81
Species 15, 16

Spongy mesophyll 51, 52
Stoma 51

Stroma 52

Structure of a Tooth 75

Succus entiricus 82

Sudan III dye 63

Surface Area to Volume Ratio 35

Symbiosis 72
Taxonomists 10
Taxonomy 10

Tissues 29

Turgor pressure 41
Unicellular organisms 18
Visking tubing 37
Vitamins 85

Wall pressure 41

Wilting 43


--- Page 71 ---

Sec. Blalogy Fl 88 2012 edition

Secondary Biology Form One Students" Book is a well written
biology book that aims at equipping students with knowledge,
attitudes and skills that can enable them exploit the environment
responsibly. It is the first book in the secondary biology series
published by Kenya Literature Bureau.The book has been updated
to match current trends in method of classification and other
advances in the science. The system of naming chemical
substances has also been standardized.

The content is in five broad topics namely: Introduction to
Biology, Classification |, The Cell, Cell Physiology and Nutrition in
Plants and Animals. Each topic is introduced in simple and precise
language and is tied to the knowledge of basic science taught
earlier in the primary cycle.

To enhance understanding of terminologies, each is explained
before use. Emerging issues such as environmental conservation
are also dealt with where they are relevant. Neat and precise
lilustrations have been widely used to enhance learning.

Practical activities are outlined at the end of each topic. These
are designed to assist the learner conduct investigations on
various discussion points and draw deductions.

Also, at the end of each topic there are revision questions that
assist the learners to evaluate themselves. Answers to these
questions are provided in the accompanying Teachers’ Guide.The
Teachers’ Guide gives a logical approach to the teaching of each of
the topics.

The Students’ Book together with the Teachers’ Guide provide
an excellent interpretation of the current 8.4.4 syllabus.

Cower Photograph: Students leaming to use a light microscope
Courtesy of Kikuyu Secondary School.

444400">

KENYA LITERATURE BUREAU |
789966

Sec. Biology Fl SB 2012 edition

